<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XVII: Sir Tristram</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-17" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</h3>
					<h4 epub:type="title">Sir Tristram</h4>
				</hgroup>
				<p>On arriving in Brittany Tristram found King Hoel engaged in a war with a rebellious vassal, and hard pressed by his enemy. His best knights had fallen in a late battle, and he knew not where to turn for assistance. Tristram volunteered his aid. It was accepted; and the army of Hoel, led by Tristram, and inspired by his example, gained a complete victory. The king, penetrated by the most lively sentiments of gratitude, and having informed himself of Tristram’s birth, offered him his daughter in marriage. The princess was beautiful and accomplished, and bore the same name with the Queen of Cornwall; but this one is designated by the Romancers as Isoude of the White Hands, to distinguish her from Isoude the Fair.</p>
				<p>How can we describe the conflict that agitated the heart of Tristram? He adored the first Isoude, but his love for her was hopeless, and not unaccompanied by remorse. Moreover, the sacred quest on which he had now entered demanded of him perfect purity of life. It seemed as if a happy destiny had provided for him in the charming princess Isoude of the White Hands the best security for all his good resolutions. This last reflection determined him. They were married, and passed some months in tranquil happiness at the court of King Hoel. The pleasure which Tristram felt in his wife’s society increased day by day. An inward grace seemed to stir within him from the moment when he took the oath to go on the quest of the Holy Greal; it seemed even to triumph over the power of the magic love-potion.</p>
				<p>The war, which had been quelled for a time, now burst out anew. Tristram as usual was foremost in every danger. The enemy was worsted in successive conflicts, and at last shut himself up in his principal city. Tristram led on the attack of the city. As he mounted a ladder to scale the walls he was struck on the head by a fragment of rock, which the besieged threw down upon him. It bore him to the ground, where he lay insensible.</p>
				<p>As soon as he recovered consciousness he demanded to be carried to his wife. The princess, skilled in the art of surgery, would not suffer anyone but herself to touch her beloved husband. Her fair hands bound up his wounds; Tristram kissed them with gratitude, which began to grow into love. At first the devoted cares of Isoude seemed to meet with great success; but after a while these flattering appearances vanished, and, in spite of all her care, the malady grew more serious day by day.</p>
				<p>In this perplexity, an old squire of Tristram’s reminded his master that the princess of Ireland, afterwards queen of Cornwall, had once cured him under circumstances quite as discouraging. He called Isoude of the White Hands to him, told her of his former cure, added that he believed that the Queen Isoude could heal him, and that he felt sure that she would come to his relief, if sent for.</p>
				<p>Isoude of the White Hands consented that Gesnes, a trusty man and skilful navigator, should be sent to Cornwall. Tristram called him, and, giving him a ring, “Take this,” he said, “to the Queen of Cornwall. Tell her that Tristram, near to death, demands her aid. If you succeed in bringing her with you, place white sails to your vessel on your return, that we may know of your success when the vessel first heaves in sight. But if Queen Isoude refuses, put on black sails; they will be the presage of my impending death.”</p>
				<p>Gesnes performed his mission successfully. King Mark happened to be absent from his capital, and the queen readily consented to return with the bark to Brittany. Gesnes clothed his vessel in the whitest of sails, and sped his way back to Brittany.</p>
				<p>Meantime the wound of Tristram grew more desperate day by day. His strength, quite prostrated, no longer permitted him to be carried to the seaside daily, as had been his custom from the first moment when it was possible for the bark to be on the way homeward. He called a young damsel, and gave her in charge to keep watch in the direction of Cornwall, and to come and tell him the color of the sails of the first vessel she should see approaching.</p>
				<p>When Isoude of the White Hands consented that the queen of Cornwall should be sent for, she had not known all the reasons which she had for fearing the influence which renewed intercourse with that princess might have on her own happiness. She had now learned more, and felt the danger more keenly. She thought, if she could only keep the knowledge of the queen’s arrival from her husband, she might employ in his service any resources which her skill could supply, and still avert the dangers which she apprehended. When the vessel was seen approaching, with its white sails sparkling in the sun, the damsel, by command of her mistress, carried word to Tristram that the sails were black.</p>
				<p>Tristram, penetrated with inexpressible grief, breathed a profound sigh, turned away his face, and said, “Alas, my beloved! we shall never see one another again!” Then he commended himself to God, and breathed his last.</p>
				<p>The death of Tristram was the first intelligence which the queen of Cornwall heard on landing. She was conducted almost senseless into the chamber of Tristram, and expired holding him in her arms.</p>
				<p>Tristram, before his death, had requested that his body should be sent to Cornwall, and that his sword, with a letter he had written, should be delivered to King Mark. The remains of Tristram and Isoude were embarked in a vessel, along with the sword, which was presented to the king of Cornwall. He was melted with tenderness when he saw the weapon which slew Moraunt of Ireland⁠—which had so often saved his life, and redeemed the honor of his kingdom. In the letter Tristram begged pardon of his uncle, and related the story of the amorous draught.</p>
				<p>Mark ordered the lovers to be buried in his own chapel. From the tomb of Tristram there sprung a vine, which went along the walls, and descended into the grave of the queen. It was cut down three times, but each time sprung up again more vigorous than before, and this wonderful plant has ever since shaded the tombs of Tristram and Isoude.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>Spenser introduces Sir Tristram in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Faery Queene</i>. In Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, Sir Calidore encounters in the forest a young hunter, whom he thus describes:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span class="i1">“Him steadfastly he marked, and saw to be</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A goodly youth of amiable grace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Yet but a slender slip, that scarce did see</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Yet seventeen yeares; but tall and faire of face,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That sure he deemed him borne of noble race.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">All in a woodman’s jacket he was clad</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of Lincoln greene, belayed with silver lace;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And on his head an hood with aglets<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-54" id="noteref-54" epub:type="noteref">54</a> sprad,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And by his side his hunter’s horne he hanging had.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">“Buskins he wore of costliest cordawayne,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Pinckt upon gold, and paled part per part,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-55" id="noteref-55" epub:type="noteref">55</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">As then the guize was for each gentle swayne.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In his right hand he held a trembling dart,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Whose fellow he before had sent apart;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And in his left he held a sharp bore-speare,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With which he wont to launch the salvage heart</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of many a lyon, and of many a beare,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That first unto his hand in chase did happen neare.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
