<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 77</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-77" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="title">
				<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span>
				<span epub:type="subtitle">TALIESIN</span>
			</h3>
			<p>Gwyddno Garanhir was sovereign of Gwaelod, a territory bordering on the sea. And he possessed a weir upon the strand between Dyvi and Aberystwyth, near to his own castle, and the value of an hundred pounds was taken in that weir every May eve. And Gwyddno had an only son named Elphin, the most hapless of youths, and the most needy. And it grieved his father sore, for he thought that he was born in an evil hour. By the advice of his council, his father had granted him the drawing of the weir that year, to see if good luck would ever befall him, and to give him something wherewith to begin the world. And this was on the twenty-ninth of April.</p>
			<p>The next day, when Elphin went to look, there was nothing in the weir but a leathern bag upon a pole of the weir. Then said the weir-ward unto Elphin, “All thy ill-luck aforetime was nothing to this; and now thou  hast destroyed the virtues of the weir, which always yielded the value of an hundred pounds every May eve; and to-night there is nothing but this leathern skin within it.” “How now,” said Elphin, “there may be therein the value of a hundred pounds.” Well! they took up the leathern bag, and he who opened it saw the forehead of an infant, the fairest that ever was seen; and he said, “Behold a radiant brow?” (In the Welsh language, <span class="it">taliesin</span>.) “Taliesin be he called,” said Elphin. And he lifted the bag in his arms, and, lamenting his bad luck, placed the boy sorrowfully behind him. And he made his horse amble gently, that before had been trotting, and he carried him as softly as if he had been siting in the easiest chair in the world. And presently the boy made a Consolation, and praise to Elphin; and the Consolation was as you may here see:</p>
			<div class="poetry-container" style="">
				<div class="lgp">
					<!-- rend=';' -->
					<div class="stanza-outer">
						<p>“Fair Elphin, cease to lament!</p>
						<p>Never in Gwyddno’s weir</p>
						<p>Was there such good luck as this night.</p>
						<p>Being sad will not avail;</p>
						<p>Better to trust in God than to forbode ill;</p>
						<p>Weak and small as I am,</p>
						<p>On the foaming beach of the ocean,</p>
						<p>In the day of trouble I shall be</p>
						<p>Of more service to thee than three hundred salmon.”</p>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<!-- end poetry block -->
			<!-- end rend -->
			<p>This was the first poem that Taliesin ever sung, being to console Elphin in his grief for that the produce of the weir was lost, and what was worse, that all the world would consider that it was through his fault and ill-luck. Then Elphin asked him what he was, whether man or spirit. And he sung thus:</p>
			<div class="poetry-container" style="">
				<div class="lgp">
					<!-- rend=';' -->
					<div class="stanza-outer">
						<p>“I have been formed a comely person;</p>
						<p>Although I am but little, I am highly gifted;</p>
						<p>Into a dark leathern bag I was thrown,</p>
						<p>And on a boundless sea I was sent adrift.</p>
						<p>From seas and from mountains</p>
						<p>God brings wealth to the fortunate man.”</p>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<!-- end poetry block -->
			<!-- end rend -->
			<p>Then came Elphin to the house of Gwyddno, his father, and Taliesin with him. Gwyddno asked him if he had had a good haul at the weir, and he told him  that he had got that which was better than fish. “What was that?” said Gwyddno. “A bard,” said Elphin. Then said Gwyddno, “Alas! what will he profit thee?” And Taliesin himself replied and said, “He will profit him more than the weir ever profited thee.” Asked Gwyddno, “Art thou able to speak, and thou so little?” And Taliesin answered him, “I am better able to speak than thou to question me.” “Let me hear what thou canst say,” quoth Gwyddno. Then Taliesin sang:</p>
			<div class="poetry-container" style="">
				<div class="lgp">
					<!-- rend=';' -->
					<div class="stanza-outer">
						<p>“Three times have I been born, I know by meditation;</p>
						<p>All the sciences of the world are collected in my breast,</p>
						<p>For I know what has been, and what hereafter will occur.”</p>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<!-- end poetry block -->
			<!-- end rend -->
			<p>Elphin gave his haul to his wife, and she nursed him tenderly and lovingly. Thenceforward Elphin increased in riches more and more, day after day, and in love and favor with the king; and there abode Taliesin until he was thirteen years old, when Elphin, son of Gwyddno, went by a Christmas invitation to his uncle, Maelgan Gwynedd, who held open court at Christmas-tide in the castle of Dyganwy, for all the number of his lords of both degrees, both spiritual and temporal, with a vast and thronged host of knights and squires. And one arose and said, “Is there in the whole world a king so great as Maelgan, or one on whom Heaven has bestowed so many gifts as upon him;—form, and beauty, and meekness, and strength, besides all the powers of the soul?” And together with these they said that Heaven had given one gift that exceeded all the others, which was the beauty, and grace, and wisdom, and modesty of his queen, whose virtues surpassed those of all the ladies and noble maidens throughout the whole kingdom. And with this they put questions one to another, Who had braver men? Who had fairer or swifter horses or greyhounds? Who had more skilful or wiser bards than Maelgan?</p>
			<p>When they had all made an end of their praising the king and his gifts, it befell that Elphin spoke on this wise. “Of a truth, none but a king may vie with a king; but were he not a king, I would say that my wife was as virtuous as any lady in the kingdom, and also that I  have a bard who is more skilful than all the king’s bards.” In a short space some of his fellows told the king all the boastings of Elphin; and the king ordered him to be thrown into a strong prison, until he might show the truth as to the virtues of his wife, and the wisdom of his bard.</p>
			<p>Now when Elphin had been put in a tower of the castle, with a thick chain about his feet (it is said that it was a silver chain, because he was of royal blood), the king, as the story relates, sent his son Rhun to inquire into the demeanor of Elphin’s wife. Now Rhun was the most graceless man in the world, and there was neither wife nor maiden with whom he held converse but was evil spoken of. While Rhun went in haste towards Elphin’s dwelling, being fully minded to bring disgrace upon his wife, Taliesin told his mistress how that the king had placed his master in durance in prison, and how that Rhun was coming in haste to strive to bring disgrace upon her. Wherefore he caused his mistress to array one of the maids of her kitchen in her apparel; which the noble lady gladly did, and she loaded her hands with the best rings that she and her husband possessed.</p>
			<p>In this guise Taliesin caused his mistress to put the maiden to sit at the board in her room at supper; and he made her to seem as her mistress, and the mistress to seem as the maid. And when they were in due time seated at their supper, in the manner that has been said, Rhun suddenly arrived at Elphin’s dwelling, and was received with joy, for the servants knew him; and they brought him to the room of their mistress, in the semblance of whom the maid rose up from supper and welcomed him gladly. And afterwards she sat down to supper again, and Rhun with her. Then Rhun began jesting with the maid, who still kept the semblance of her mistress. And verily this story shows that the maiden became so intoxicated that she fell asleep; and the story relates that it was a powder that Rhun put into the drink, that made her sleep so soundly that she never felt it when he cut off from her hand her little finger, whereon was the signet ring of Elphin, which he  had sent to his wife as a token a short time before. And Rhun returned to the king with the finger and the ring as a proof, to show that he had cut it off from her hand without her awaking from her sleep of intemperance.</p>
			<p>The king rejoiced greatly at these tidings, and he sent for his councillors, to whom he told the whole story from the beginning. And he caused Elphin to be brought out of prison, and he chided him because of his boast. And he spake on this wise: “Elphin, be it known to thee beyond a doubt, that it is but folly for a man to trust in the virtues of his wife further than he can see her; and that thou mayest be certain of thy wife’s vileness, behold her finger, with thy signet ring upon it, which was cut from her hand last night, while she slept the sleep of intoxication.” Then thus spake Elphin: “With thy leave, mighty king, I cannot deny my ring, for it is known of many; but verily I assert that the finger around which it is was never attached to the hand of my wife; for in truth and certainty there are three notable things pertaining to it, none of which ever belonged to any of my wife’s fingers. The first of the three is, that it is certainly known to me that this ring would never remain upon her thumb, whereas you can plainly see that it is hard to draw it over the joint of the little finger of the hand whence this was cut. The second thing is, that my wife has never let pass one Saturday since I have known her, without paring her nails before going to bed, and you can see fully that the nail of this little finger has not been pared for a month. The third is, truly, that the hand whence this finger came was kneading rye dough within three days before the finger was cut therefrom, and I can assure your highness that my wife has never kneaded rye dough since my wife she has been.”</p>
			<p>The king was mightily wroth with Elphin for so stoutly withstanding him, respecting the goodness of his wife; wherefore he ordered him to his prison a second time, saying that he should not be loosed thence until he had proved the truth of his boast, as well concerning the wisdom of his bard as the virtues of his wife.</p>
			<p>In the meantime his wife and Taliesin remained joyful at Elphin’s dwelling. And Taliesin showed his mistress how that Elphin was in prison because of them; but he bade her be glad, for that he would go to Maelgan’s court to free his master. So he took leave of his mistress, and came to the court of Maelgan, who was going to sit in his hall, and dine in his royal state, as it was the custom in those days for kings and princes to do at every chief feast. As soon as Taliesin entered the hall he placed himself in a quiet corner, near the place where the bards and the minstrels were wont to come, in doing their service and duty to the king, as is the custom at the high festivals, when the bounty is proclaimed. So, when the bards and the heralds came to cry largess, and to proclaim the power of the king, and his strength, at the moment when they passed by the corner wherein he was crouching, Taliesin pouted out his lips after them, and played “Blerwm, blerwm!” with his finger upon his lips. Neither took they much notice of him as they went by but proceeded forward till they came before the king, unto whom they made their obeisance with their bodies, as they were wont, without speaking a single word, but pouting out their lips, and making mouths at the king, playing, “Blerwm, blerwm!” upon their lips with their fingers, as they had seen the boy do. This sight caused the king to wonder, and to deem within himself that they were drunk with many liquors. Wherefore he commanded one of his lords, who served at the board, to go to them and desire them to collect their wits, and to consider where they stood, and what it was fitting for them to do. And this lord did so gladly. But they ceased not from their folly any more than before. Whereupon he sent to them a second time, and a third, desiring them to go forth from the hall. At the last the king ordered one of his squires to give a blow to the chief of them, named Heinin Vardd; and the squire took a broom and struck him on the head, so that he fell back in his seat. Then he arose, and went on his knees, and besought leave of the king’s grace to show that this their fault was not through want of knowledge, neither through drunkenness, but by  the influence of some spirit that was in the hall. And he spoke on this wise: “O honorable king, be it known to your grace that not from the strength of drink, or of too much liquor, are we dumb, but through the influence of a spirit that sits in the corner yonder, in the form of a child.” Forthwith the king commanded the squire to fetch him; and he went to the nook where Taliesin sat, and brought him before the king, who asked him what he was, and whence he came. And he answered the king in verse:</p>
			<div class="poetry-container" style="">
				<div class="lgp">
					<!-- rend=';' -->
					<div class="stanza-outer">
						<p>“Primary chief bard am I to Elphin,</p>
						<p>And my native country is the region of the summer stars;</p>
						<p>I have been in Asia with Noah in the ark,</p>
						<p>I have seen the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah,</p>
						<p>I was in India when Rome was built,</p>
						<p>I have now come here to the remnant of Troia.”</p>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<!-- end poetry block -->
			<!-- end rend -->
			<p>When the king and his nobles had heard the song, they wondered much, for they had never heard the like from a boy so young as he. And when the king knew that he was the bard of Elphin he bade Heinin, his first and wisest bard, to answer Taliesin, and to strive with him. But when he came he could do no other than play “Blerwm!” on his lips; and when he sent for the others of the four and twenty bards, they all did likewise, and could do no other. And Maelgan asked the boy Taliesin what was his errand, and he answered him in song:</p>
			<div class="poetry-container" style="">
				<div class="lgp">
					<!-- rend=';' -->
					<div class="stanza-outer">
						<p>“Elphin, the son of Gwyddno,</p>
						<p>Is in the land of Artro,</p>
						<p>Secured by thirteen locks,</p>
						<p>For praising his instructor.</p>
						<p>Therefore I, Taliesin,</p>
						<p>Chief of the bards of the west,</p>
						<p>Will loosen Elphin</p>
						<p>Out of a golden fetter.”</p>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<!-- end poetry block -->
			<!-- end rend -->
			<p>Then he sang to them a riddle:</p>
			<div class="poetry-container" style="">
				<div class="lgp">
					<!-- rend=';' -->
					<div class="stanza-outer">
						<p>“Discover thou what is</p>
						<p>The strong creature from before the flood,</p>
						<p>Without flesh, without bone,</p>
						<p>Without vein, without blood,</p>
						<p>Without head, without feet;</p>
						<p>It will neither be older nor younger</p>
						<p>

					</p>
						<p>Than at the beginning.</p>
						<p>Behold how the sea whitens</p>
						<p>When first it comes,</p>
						<p>When it comes from the south,</p>
						<p>When it strikes on coasts.</p>
						<p>It is in the field, it is in the wood,</p>
						<p>But the eye cannot perceive it.</p>
						<p>One Being has prepared it,</p>
						<p>By a tremendous blast,</p>
						<p>To wreak vengeance</p>
						<p>On Maelgan Gwynedd.</p>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<!-- end poetry block -->
			<!-- end rend -->
			<p>While he was thus singing his verse, there arose a mighty storm of wind, so that the king and all his nobles thought that the castle would fall upon their heads. And the king caused them to fetch Elphin in haste from his dungeon, and placed him before Taliesin. And it is said that immediately he sung a verse, so that the chains opened from about his feet.</p>
			<p>After that Taliesin brought Elphin’s wife before them, and showed that she had not one finger wanting. And in this manner did he set his master free from prison, and protect the innocence of his mistress, and silence the bards so that not one of them dared to say a word. Right glad was Elphin, right glad was Taliesin.</p>
			<p>

		</p>
			<p>FOOTNOTES</p>
			<hr class="footnotemark"/>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f1"><a href="#r1">[1]</a></span> Wordsworth.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f2"><a href="#r2">[2]</a></span> The names included in parentheses are the Greek, the others being the Roman or Latin names.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f3"><a href="#r3">[3]</a></span> This inconsistency arises from considering the Saturn of the Romans the same with the Grecian deity Cronos (Time), which, as it brings an end to all things which have had a beginning, may be said to devour its own offspring.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f4"><a href="#r4">[4]</a></span> From this origin of the instrument, the word “shell” is often used as synonymous with “lyre,” and figuratively for music and poetry. Thus Gray, in his ode on the “Progress of Poesy,” says:</p>
				<div class="poetry-container" style="">
					<div class="lgp">
						<!-- rend=';' -->
						<div class="stanza-outer">
							<p>“O Sovereign of the willing Soul,</p>
							<p>Parent of sweet and solemn-breathing airs,</p>
							<p>Enchanting shell! the sullen Cares</p>
							<p>And frantic Passions hear thy soft control.”</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<!-- end poetry block -->
				<!-- end rend -->
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f5"><a href="#r5">[5]</a></span> <a id="fn10n"/>There was also a goddess called Fauna, or Bona Dea.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f6"><a href="#r6">[6]</a></span> <a id="fn15n"/>The goddess of innocence and purity. After leaving earth, she was placed among the stars, where she became the constellation Virgo—the Virgin. Themis (Justice) was the mother of Astræa. She is represented as holding aloft a pair of scales, in which she weighs the claims of opposing parties.</p>
				<p>It was a favorite idea of the old poets that these goddesses would one day return, and bring back the Golden Age. Even in a Christian hymn, the “Messiah” of Pope, this idea occurs:</p>
				<div class="poetry-container" style="">
					<div class="lgp">
						<!-- rend=';' -->
						<div class="stanza-outer">
							<p>“All crimes shall cease, and ancient fraud shall fail,</p>
							<p>Returning Justice lift aloft her scale,</p>
							<p>Peace o’er the world her olive wand extend,</p>
							<p>And white-robed Innocence from heaven descend.”</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<!-- end poetry block -->
				<!-- end rend -->
				<p>See, also, Milton’s “Hymn on the Nativity,” stanzas xiv. and xv.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p>
					<span class="footnote-id" id="f7">
						<a href="#r7">[7]</a>
					</span>
					<a href="#pe1">See Proverbial Expressions.</a>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p>
					<span class="footnote-id" id="f8">
						<a href="#r8">[8]</a>
					</span>
					<a href="#pe2">See Proverbial Expressions.</a>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p>
					<span class="footnote-id" id="f9">
						<a href="#r9">[9]</a>
					</span>
					<a href="#pe3">See Proverbial Expressions.</a>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p>
					<span class="footnote-id" id="f10">
						<a href="#r10">[10]</a>
					</span>
					<a href="#pe4">See Proverbial Expressions.</a>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f11"><a href="#r11">[11]</a></span> See page <a href="#Page_241">241</a>.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f12"><a href="#r12">[12]</a></span> It is evidently not our modern hyacinth that is here described. It is perhaps some species of iris, or perhaps of larkspur or of pansy.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f13"><a href="#r13">[13]</a></span> The sunflower.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f14"><a href="#r14">[14]</a></span> This correct description of the rainbow is literally translated from Ovid.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f15"><a href="#r15">[15]</a></span> Sir James Mackintosh says of this, “Do you think that even a Chinese could paint the gay colors of a butterfly with more minute exactness than the following lines: ‘The velvet nap,’ etc.?”—<span class="it">Life</span>, Vol. II., 246.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p>
					<span class="footnote-id" id="f16">
						<a href="#r16">[16]</a>
					</span>
					<a href="#pe5">See Proverbial Expressions.</a>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f17"><a href="#r17">[17]</a></span> <a id="fn134n"/>Hecate was a mysterious divinity sometimes identified with Diana and sometimes with Proserpine. As Diana represents the moonlight splendor of night, so Hecate represents its darkness and terrors. She was the goddess of sorcery and witchcraft, and was believed to wander by night along the earth, seen only by the dogs, whose barking told her approach.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f18"><a href="#r18">[18]</a></span> Alcides, a name of Hercules.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f19"><a href="#r19">[19]</a></span> One of the finest pieces of sculpture in Italy, the recumbent Ariadne of the Vatican, represents this incident. A copy is owned by the Athenæum, Boston, and deposited in the Museum of Fine Arts.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f20"><a href="#r20">[20]</a></span> Proteus.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f21"><a href="#r21">[21]</a></span> The story of the invulnerability of Achilles is not found in Homer, and is inconsistent with his account. For how could Achilles require the aid of celestial armor if he were invulnerable?</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f22"><a href="#r22">[22]</a></span> Tennyson has chosen Œnone as the subject of a short poem; but he has omitted the most poetical part of the story, the return of Paris wounded, her cruelty and subsequent repentance.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p>
					<span class="footnote-id" id="f23">
						<a href="#r23">[23]</a>
					</span>
					<a href="#pe6">See Proverbial Expressions.</a>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f24"><a href="#r24">[24]</a></span> Pyrrhus’s exclamation, “Not such aid nor such defenders does the time require,” has become proverbial. <a href="#pe7">See Proverbial Expressions.</a></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f25"><a href="#r25">[25]</a></span> Tennyson in the “Lotus-eaters” has charmingly expressed the dreamy, languid feeling which the lotus food is said to have produced.</p>
				<div class="poetry-container" style="">
					<div class="lgp">
						<!-- rend=';' -->
						<div class="stanza-outer">
							<p>“How sweet it were, hearing the downward stream</p>
							<p>With half-shut eyes ever to seem</p>
							<p>Falling asleep in a half dream!</p>
							<p>To dream and dream, like yonder amber light</p>
							<p>Which will not leave the myrrh-bush on the height;</p>
							<p>To hear each others’ whispered speech;</p>
							<p>Eating the Lotos, day by day,</p>
							<p>To watch the crisping ripples on the beach,</p>
							<p>And tender curving lines of creamy spray:</p>
							<p>To lend our hearts and spirits wholly</p>
							<p>To the influence of mild-minded melancholy;</p>
							<p>To muse and brood and live again in memory,</p>
							<p>With those old faces of our infancy</p>
							<p>Heaped over with a mound of grass,</p>
							<p>Two handfuls of white dust, shut in an urn of brass.”</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<!-- end poetry block -->
				<!-- end rend -->
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p>
					<span class="footnote-id" id="f26">
						<a href="#r26">[26]</a>
					</span>
					<a href="#pe9">See Proverbial Expressions.</a>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p>
					<span class="footnote-id" id="f27">
						<a href="#r27">[27]</a>
					</span>
					<a href="#pe10">See Proverbial Expressions.</a>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p>
					<span class="footnote-id" id="f28">
						<a href="#r28">[28]</a>
					</span>
					<a href="#pe11">See Proverbial Expressions.</a>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p>
					<span class="footnote-id" id="f29">
						<a href="#r29">[29]</a>
					</span>
					<a href="#pe12">See Proverbial Expressions.</a>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p>
					<span class="footnote-id" id="f30">
						<a href="#r30">[30]</a>
					</span>
					<a href="#pe13">See Proverbial Expressions.</a>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p>
					<span class="footnote-id" id="f31">
						<a href="#r31">[31]</a>
					</span>
					<a href="#pe14">See Proverbial Expressions.</a>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p>
					<span class="footnote-id" id="f32">
						<a href="#r32">[32]</a>
					</span>
					<a href="#pe15">See Proverbial Expressions.</a>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f33"><a href="#r33">[33]</a></span> The poet here inserts a famous line which is thought to imitate in its sound the galloping of horses. It may be thus translated: “Then struck the hoofs of the steeds on the ground with a four-footed trampling.”—<a href="#pe16">See Proverbial Expressions.</a></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p>
					<span class="footnote-id" id="f34">
						<a href="#r34">[34]</a>
					</span>
					<a href="#pe17">See Proverbial Expressions.</a>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f35"><a href="#r35">[35]</a></span> There being no rain in Egypt, the grass is “unshowered,” and the country depends for its fertility upon the overflowings of the Nile. The ark alluded to in the last line is shown by pictures still remaining on the walls of the Egyptian temples to have been borne by the priests in their religious processions. It probably represented the chest in which Osiris was placed.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f36"><a href="#r36">[36]</a></span> Cowper’s version is less elegant, but truer to the original:</p>
				<div class="poetry-container" style="">
					<div class="lgp">
						<!-- rend=';' -->
						<div class="stanza-outer">
							<p>“He ceased, and under his dark brows the nod</p>
							<p>Vouchsafed of confirmation. All around</p>
							<p>The sovereign’s everlasting head his curls</p>
							<p>Ambrosial shook, and the huge mountain reeled.”</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<!-- end poetry block -->
				<!-- end rend -->
				<p>It may interest our readers to see how this passage appears in another famous version, that which was issued under the name of Tickell, contemporaneously with Pope’s, and which, being by many attributed to Addison, led to the quarrel which ensued between Addison and Pope:</p>
				<div class="poetry-container" style="">
					<div class="lgp">
						<!-- rend=';' -->
						<div class="stanza-outer">
							<p>“This said, his kingly brow the sire inclined;</p>
							<p>The large black curls fell awful from behind,</p>
							<p>Thick shadowing the stern forehead of the god;</p>
							<p>Olympus trembled at the almighty nod.”</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<!-- end poetry block -->
				<!-- end rend -->
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f37"><a href="#r37">[37]</a></span> Gray’s ode, “The Fatal Sisters,” is founded on this superstition.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f38"><a href="#r38">[38]</a></span> In Longfellow’s Poems will be found a poem entitled “Tegner’s Drapa,” upon the subject of Baldur’s death.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p>
					<span class="footnote-id" id="f39">
						<a href="#r39">[39]</a>
					</span>
				</p>
				<div class="poetry-container" style="">
					<div class="lgp">
						<!-- rend=';' -->
						<div class="stanza-outer">
							<div class="stanza-inner">
								<p>“For noble Britons sprong from Trojans bold,</p>
								<p>And Troynovant was built of old Troy’s ashes cold.”</p>
								<p>Spenser, Book III., Canto IX., 38.</p>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<!-- end poetry block -->
				<!-- end rend -->
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f40"><a href="#r40">[40]</a></span> <span class="it">Buried under beare.</span> Buried under something which enclosed him like a coffin or bier.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f41"><a href="#r41">[41]</a></span> Glastonbury Abbey, said to be founded by Joseph of Arimathea, in a spot anciently called the island or valley of Avalonia.</p>
				<p>Tennyson, in his “Palace of Art,” alludes to the legend of Arthur’s rescue by the Faery queen, thus:</p>
				<div class="poetry-container" style="">
					<div class="lgp">
						<!-- rend=';' -->
						<div class="stanza-outer">
							<p>“Or mythic Uther’s deeply wounded son,</p>
							<p>In some fair space of sloping greens,</p>
							<p>Lay dozing in the vale of Avalon,</p>
							<p>And watched by weeping queens.”</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<!-- end poetry block -->
				<!-- end rend -->
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f42"><a href="#r42">[42]</a></span> Guenever, the name of Arthur’s queen, also written Genievre and Geneura, is familiar to all who are conversant with chivalric lore. It is to her adventures, and those of her true knight, Sir Launcelot, that Dante alludes in the beautiful episode of Francesca da Rimini.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f43"><a href="#r43">[43]</a></span> This name, in the French romances, is spelled Queux, which means <span class="it">head cook</span>. This would seem to imply that it was a title, and not a name; yet the personage who bore it is never mentioned by any other. He is the chief, if not the only, comic character among the heroes of Arthur’s court. He is the Seneschal or Steward, his duties also embracing those of chief of the cooks. In the romances, his general character is a compound of valor and buffoonery, always ready to fight, and generally getting the worst of the battle. He is also sarcastic and abusive in his remarks, by which he often gets into trouble. Yet Arthur seems to have an attachment to him, and often takes his advice, which is generally wrong.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f44"><a href="#r44">[44]</a></span> Several cities are allotted to King Arthur by the romance-writers. The principal are Caerleon, Camelot, and Carlisle.</p>
				<p>Caerleon derives its name from its having been the station of one of the legions, during the dominion of the Romans. It is called by Latin writers Urbs Legionum, the City of Legions. The former word being rendered into Welsh by <span class="it">Caer</span>, meaning city, and the latter contracted into <span class="it">lleon</span>. The river Usk retains its name in modern geography, and there is a town or city of Caerleon upon it, though the city of Cardiff is thought to be the scene of Arthur’s court. Chester also bears in Welsh the name of Caerleon; for Chester, derived from <span class="it">castra</span>, Latin for <span class="it">camp</span>, is the designation of military headquarters.</p>
				<p>Camelot is thought to be Winchester.</p>
				<p>Shalott is Guilford.</p>
				<p>Hamo’s Port is Southampton.</p>
				<p>Carlisle is the city still retaining that name, near the Scottish border. But this name is also sometimes applied to other places, which were, like itself, military stations.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f45"><a href="#r45">[45]</a></span> <span class="it">Samite</span>, a sort of silk stuff.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f46"><a href="#r46">[46]</a></span> <span class="it">N’as</span> is <span class="it">not was</span>, contracted; in modern phrase, <span class="it">there was not Mochel sorwe</span> is <span class="it">much sorrow</span>; <span class="it">morwe</span> is <span class="it">morrow</span>.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f47"><a href="#r47">[47]</a></span> New-fangled—fond of novelty.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f48"><a href="#r48">[48]</a></span> <span class="it">Lunys</span>, the string with which the falcon is held.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f49"><a href="#r49">[49]</a></span> A musical instrument.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f50"><a href="#r50">[50]</a></span> “Good faith was the very corner-stone of chivalry. Whenever a knight’s word was pledged (it mattered not how rashly) it was to be redeemed at any price. Hence the sacred obligation of the <span class="it">boon granted</span> by a knight to his suppliant. Instances without number occur in romance, in which a knight, by rashly granting an indefinite boon, was obliged to do or suffer something extremely to his prejudice. But it is not in romance alone that we find such singular instances of adherence to an indefinite promise. The history of the times presents authentic transactions equally embarrassing and absurd.”—Scott, <span class="it">note to Sir Tristram</span>.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f51"><a href="#r51">[51]</a></span> <span class="it">Feres</span>, companions; <span class="it">thewes</span>, labors; <span class="it">leers</span>, learning.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f52"><a href="#r52">[52]</a></span> <span class="it">Aglets</span>, points or tags.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f53"><a href="#r53">[53]</a></span> <span class="it">Pinckt upon gold, etc.</span>, adorned with golden points, or eyelets, and regularly intersected with stripes. <span class="it">Paled</span> (in heraldry), striped.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f54"><a href="#r54">[54]</a></span> A fool was a common appendage of the courts of those days when this romance was written. A fool was the ornament held in next estimation to a dwarf. He wore a white dress with a yellow bonnet, and carried a bell or <span class="it">bawble</span> in his hand. Though called a fool, his words were often weighed and remembered as if there were a sort of oracular meaning in them.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f55"><a href="#r55">[55]</a></span> The word means both <span class="it">fisher</span> and <span class="it">sinner</span>.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f56"><a href="#r56">[56]</a></span> The use of green rushes in apartments was by no means peculiar to the court of Caerleon upon Usk. Our ancestors had a great predilection for them, and they seem to have constituted an essential article, not only of comfort, but of luxury. The custom of strewing the floor with rushes is well known to have existed in England during the Middle Ages, and also in France.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f57"><a href="#r57">[57]</a></span> <span class="it">Cordwal</span> is the word in the original, and from the manner in which it is used it is evidently intended for the French Cordouan or Cordovan leather, which derived its name from Cordova, where it was manufactured. From this comes also our English word <span class="it">cordwainer</span>.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f58"><a href="#r58">[58]</a></span> Amongst all the characters of early British history none is more interesting, or occupies a more conspicuous place, than the hero of this tale. Urien, his father, was prince of Rheged, a district comprising the present Cumberland and part of the adjacent country. His valor, and the consideration in which he was held, are a frequent theme of Bardic song, and form the subject of several very spirited odes by Taliesin. Among the Triads there is one relating to him; it is thus translated:</p>
				<p>“Three Knights of Battle were in the court of Arthur: Cadwr, the Earl of Cornwall, Launcelot du Lac, and Owain, the son of Urien. And this was their characteristic—that they would not retreat from battle, neither for spear, nor for arrow, nor for sword. And Arthur never had shame in battle the day he saw their faces there. And they were called the Knights of Battle.”</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f59"><a href="#r59">[59]</a></span> Before the sixth century all the silk used by Europeans had been brought to them by the Seres, the ancestors of the present Boukharians, whence it derived its Latin name of Serica. In 551 the silkworm was brought by two monks to Constantinople; but the manufacture of silk was confined to the Greek empire till the year 1130, when Roger, king of Sicily, returning from a crusade, collected some manufacturers from Athens and Corinth, and established them at Palermo, whence the trade was gradually disseminated over Italy. The varieties of silk stuffs known at this time were velvet, satin (which was called <span class="it">samite</span>), and taffety (called <span class="it">cendal</span> or <span class="it">sendall</span>), all of which were occasionally stitched with gold and silver.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f60"><a href="#r60">[60]</a></span> There exists an ancient poem, printed among those of Taliesin, called the “Elegy of Owain ap Urien,” and containing several very beautiful and spirited passages. It commences:</p>
				<div class="poetry-container" style="">
					<div class="lgp">
						<!-- rend=';' -->
						<div class="stanza-outer">
							<p>“The soul of Owain ap Urien,</p>
							<p>May its Lord consider its exigencies!</p>
							<p>Reged’s chief the green turf covers.”</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<!-- end poetry block -->
				<!-- end rend -->
				<p>In the course of this Elegy the bard, alluding to the incessant warfare with which this chieftain harassed his Saxon foes, exclaims:</p>
				<p>“Could England sleep with the light upon her eyes!”</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f61"><a href="#r61">[61]</a></span> The custom of riding into a hall while the lord and his guests sat at meat might be illustrated by numerous passages of ancient romance and history. But a quotation from Chaucer’s beautiful and half-told tale of “Cambuscan” is sufficient:</p>
				<div class="poetry-container" style="">
					<div class="lgp">
						<!-- rend=';' -->
						<div class="stanza-outer">
							<p>“And so befell that after the thridde cours,</p>
							<p>While that this king sat thus in his nobley,</p>
							<p>Herking his minstralles thir thinges play,</p>
							<p>Beforne him at his bord deliciously,</p>
							<p>In at the halle door all sodenly</p>
							<p>Ther came a knight upon a stede of bras,</p>
							<p>And in his hond a brod mirrour of glas;</p>
							<p>Upon his thombe he had of gold a ring,</p>
							<p>And by his side a naked sword hanging;</p>
							<p>And up he rideth to the highe bord.</p>
							<p>In all the halle ne was ther spoke a word,</p>
							<p>For mervaille of this knight; him to behold</p>
							<p>Full besily they waiten, young and old.”</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<!-- end poetry block -->
				<!-- end rend -->
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f62"><a href="#r62">[62]</a></span> The terms of admiration in which the older writers invariably speak of <span class="it">glass windows</span> would be sufficient proof, if other evidence were wanting, how rare an article of luxury they were in the houses of our ancestors. They were first introduced in ecclesiastical architecture, to which they were for a long time confined. Glass is said not to have been employed in domestic architecture before the fourteenth century.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f63"><a href="#r63">[63]</a></span> Throughout the broad and varied region of romance it would be difficult to find a character of greater simplicity and truth than that of Enid, the daughter of Earl Ynywl. Conspicuous for her beauty and noble bearing, we are at a loss whether more to admire the patience with which she bore all the hardships she was destined to undergo or the constancy and affection which finally achieved the triumph she so richly deserved.</p>
				<p>The character of Enid is admirably sustained through the whole tale; and as it is more natural, because less overstrained, so perhaps it is even more touching than that of Griselda, over which, however, Chaucer has thrown a charm that leads us to forget the improbability of her story.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f64"><a href="#r64">[64]</a></span> The Island of the Mighty is one of the many names bestowed upon Britain by the Welsh.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f65"><a href="#r65">[65]</a></span> Caractacus.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f66"><a href="#r66">[66]</a></span> Cassivellaunus.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f67"><a href="#r67">[67]</a></span> There is a Triad upon the story of the head buried under the White Tower of London, as a charm against invasion. Arthur, it seems, proudly disinterred the head, preferring to hold the island by his own strength alone.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f68"><a href="#r68">[68]</a></span> Creiddylad is no other than Shakspeare’s Cordelia, whose father, King Lear, is by the Welsh authorities called indiscriminately Llyr or Lludd. All the old chronicles give the story of her devotion to her aged parent, but none of them seem to have been aware that she is destined to remain with him till the day of doom, whilst Gwyn ap Nudd, the king of the fairies, and Gwythyr ap Greidiol, fight for her every first of May, and whichever of them may be fortunate enough to be the conqueror at that time will obtain her as a bride.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f69"><a href="#r69">[69]</a></span> The Welsh have a fable on the subject of the half-man, taken to be illustrative of the force of habit. In this allegory Arthur is supposed to be met by a sprite, who appears at first in a small and indistinct form, but who, on approaching nearer, increases in size, and, assuming the semblance of half a man, endeavors to provoke the king to wrestle. Despising his weakness, and considering that he should gain no credit by the encounter, Arthur refuses to do so, and delays the contest until at length the half-man (Habit) becomes so strong that it requires his utmost efforts to overcome him.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f70"><a href="#r70">[70]</a></span> The romancers dwell with great complacency on the fair hair and delicate complexion of their heroines. This taste continued for a long time, and to render the hair light was an object of education. Even when wigs came into fashion they were all flaxen. Such was the color of the hair of the Gauls and of their German conquerors. It required some centuries to reconcile their eyes to the swarthy beauties of their Spanish and Italian neighbors.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f71"><a href="#r71">[71]</a></span> <span class="it">Ivanhoe</span>, Vol. 1, chap. XIII.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f72"><a href="#r72">[72]</a></span> It is plain that Shakspeare borrowed from this source the similar incident in his “As you Like it.” The names of characters in the play, Orlando, Oliver, Rowland indicate the same thing.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f73"><a href="#r73">[73]</a></span> See their story in “King Arthur and His Knights.”</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f74"><a href="#r74">[74]</a></span> This is a poetical description of a phenomenon which is said to be really exhibited in the strait of Messina, between Sicily and Calabria. It is called Fata Morgana, or Mirage.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><span class="footnote-id" id="f75"><a href="#r75">[75]</a></span> This prophecy is introduced by Ariosto in this place to compliment the noble house of Este, the princes of his native state, the dukedom of Ferrara.</p>
			</div>
			<h3>PROVERBIAL EXPRESSIONS</h3>
			<h4><a id="pe1"/>No. 1. Page <a href="#Page_39">39</a>.</h4>
			<div class="poetry-container" style="">
				<div class="lgp">
					<!-- rend=';' -->
					<div class="stanza-outer">
						<p>Materiem superabat opus.—<span class="it">Ovid.</span></p>
						<p>The workmanship surpassed the material.</p>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<!-- end poetry block -->
			<!-- end rend -->
			<h4><a id="pe2"/>No. 2. Page <a href="#Page_39">39</a>.</h4>
			<div class="poetry-container" style="">
				<div class="lgp">
					<!-- rend=';' -->
					<div class="stanza-outer">
						<div class="stanza-inner">
							<p>Facies non omnibus una,</p>
							<p>Nec diversa tamen, qualem decet esse sororum.</p>
							<p>—<span class="it">Ovid.</span></p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<!-- end poetry block -->
			<!-- end rend -->
			<p>
				<span style="font-size:smaller">Their faces were not all alike, nor yet unlike, but such as those of sisters ought to be.</span>
			</p>
			<h4><a id="pe3"/>No. 3. Page <a href="#Page_42">42</a>.</h4>
			<div class="poetry-container" style="">
				<div class="lgp">
					<!-- rend=';' -->
					<div class="stanza-outer">
						<p>Medio tutissimus ibis.—<span class="it">Ovid.</span></p>
						<p>You will go most safely in the middle.</p>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<!-- end poetry block -->
			<!-- end rend -->
			<h4><a id="pe4"/>No. 4. Page <a href="#Page_45">45</a>.</h4>
			<div class="poetry-container" style="">
				<div class="lgp">
					<!-- rend=';' -->
					<div class="stanza-outer">
						<div class="stanza-inner">
							<p>Hic situs est PhaÃ«ton, currus auriga paterni,</p>
							<p>Quem si non tenuit, magnis tamen excidit ausis.</p>
							<p>—<span class="it">Ovid.</span></p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<!-- end poetry block -->
			<!-- end rend -->
			<p>
				<span style="font-size:smaller">Here lies Phaëton, the driver of his father’s chariot, which if he failed to manage, yet he fell in a great undertaking.</span>
			</p>
			<h4><a id="pe5"/>No. 5. Page <a href="#Page_123">123</a>.</h4>
			<div class="poetry-container" style="">
				<div class="lgp">
					<!-- rend=';' -->
					<div class="stanza-outer">
						<p>Imponere Pelio Ossam.—<span class="it">Virgil.</span></p>
						<p>To pile Ossa upon Pelion.</p>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<!-- end poetry block -->
			<!-- end rend -->
			<h4><a id="pe6"/>No. 6. Page <a href="#Page_230">230</a>.</h4>
			<div class="poetry-container" style="">
				<div class="lgp">
					<!-- rend=';' -->
					<div class="stanza-outer">
						<p>Timeo Danaos et dona ferentes.—<span class="it">Virgil.</span></p>
						<p>I fear the Greeks even when they offer gifts.</p>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<!-- end poetry block -->
			<!-- end rend -->
			<h4><a id="pe7"/>No. 7. Page <a href="#Page_232">232</a>.</h4>
			<div class="poetry-container" style="">
				<div class="lgp">
					<!-- rend=';' -->
					<div class="stanza-outer">
						<p>Non tali auxilio nec defensoribus istis</p>
						<p>Tempus eget.—<span class="it">Virgil.</span></p>
						<p>Not such aid nor such defenders does the time require.</p>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<!-- end poetry block -->
			<!-- end rend -->
			<h4><a id="pe8"/>No. 8. Page <a href="#Page_245">245</a>.</h4>
			<div class="poetry-container" style="">
				<div class="lgp">
					<!-- rend=';' -->
					<div class="stanza-outer">
						<p>Incidit in Scyllam, cupiens vitare Charybdim.</p>
						<p>He runs on Scylla, wishing to avoid Charybdis.</p>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<!-- end poetry block -->
			<!-- end rend -->
			<p>

		</p>
			<h4><a id="pe9"/>No. 9. Page <a href="#Page_260">260</a>.</h4>
			<div class="poetry-container" style="">
				<div class="lgp">
					<!-- rend=';' -->
					<div class="stanza-outer">
						<p>Monstrum horrendum, informe, ingens, cui lumen ademptum.—<span class="it">Virgil.</span></p>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<!-- end poetry block -->
			<!-- end rend -->
			<p>
				<span style="font-size:smaller">A horrible monster, misshapen, vast, whose only eye has been put out.</span>
			</p>
			<h4><a id="pe10"/>No. 10. Page <a href="#Page_261">261</a>.</h4>
			<div class="poetry-container" style="">
				<div class="lgp">
					<!-- rend=';' -->
					<div class="stanza-outer">
						<p>Tantæne animis cœlestibus iræ?—<span class="it">Virgil.</span></p>
						<p>In heavenly minds can such resentments dwell?</p>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<!-- end poetry block -->
			<!-- end rend -->
			<h4><a id="pe11"/>No. 11. Page <a href="#Page_263">263</a>.</h4>
			<div class="poetry-container" style="">
				<div class="lgp">
					<!-- rend=';' -->
					<div class="stanza-outer">
						<p>Haud ignara mali, miseris succurrere disco.—<span class="it">Virgil.</span></p>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<!-- end poetry block -->
			<!-- end rend -->
			<p>
				<span style="font-size:smaller">Not unacquainted with distress, I have learned to succor the unfortunate.</span>
			</p>
			<h4><a id="pe12"/>No. 12. Page <a href="#Page_263">263</a>.</h4>
			<div class="poetry-container" style="">
				<div class="lgp">
					<!-- rend=';' -->
					<div class="stanza-outer">
						<p>Tros, Tyriusve mihi nullo discrimine agetur.—<span class="it">Virgil.</span></p>
						<p>Whether Trojan or Tyrian shall make no difference to me.</p>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<!-- end poetry block -->
			<!-- end rend -->
			<h4><a id="pe13"/>No. 13. Page <a href="#Page_265">265</a>.</h4>
			<div class="poetry-container" style="">
				<div class="lgp">
					<!-- rend=';' -->
					<div class="stanza-outer">
						<p>Tu ne cede malis, sed contra audentior ito.—<span class="it">Virgil.</span></p>
						<p>Yield thou not to adversity, but press on the more bravely.</p>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<!-- end poetry block -->
			<!-- end rend -->
			<h4><a id="pe14"/>No. 14. Page <a href="#Page_265">265</a>.</h4>
			<div class="poetry-container" style="">
				<div class="lgp">
					<!-- rend=';' -->
					<div class="stanza-outer">
						<p>Facilis descensus Averni;</p>
						<p>Noctes atque dies patet atri janua Ditis;</p>
						<p>Sed revocare gradum, superasque evadere ad auras,</p>
						<p>Hoc opus, hic labor est.—<span class="it">Virgil.</span></p>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<!-- end poetry block -->
			<!-- end rend -->
			<p>
				<span style="font-size:smaller">The descent of Avernus is easy; the gate of Pluto stands open night and day; but to retrace one’s steps and return to the upper air—that is the toil, that the difficulty.</span>
			</p>
			<h4><a id="pe15"/>No. 15. Page <a href="#Page_265">265</a>.</h4>
			<div class="poetry-container" style="">
				<div class="lgp">
					<!-- rend=';' -->
					<div class="stanza-outer">
						<p>Uno avulso non deficit alter.—<span class="it">Virgil.</span></p>
						<p>When one is torn away another succeeds.</p>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<!-- end poetry block -->
			<!-- end rend -->
			<h4><a id="pe16"/>No. 16. Page <a href="#Page_282">282</a>.</h4>
			<div class="poetry-container" style="">
				<div class="lgp">
					<!-- rend=';' -->
					<div class="stanza-outer">
						<p>Quadrupendante putrum sonitu quatit ungula campum.—<span class="it">Virgil.</span></p>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<!-- end poetry block -->
			<!-- end rend -->
			<p>
				<span style="font-size:smaller">Then struck the hoofs of the steeds on the ground with a four-footed trampling.</span>
			</p>
			<h4><a id="pe17"/>No. 17. Page <a href="#Page_285">285</a>.</h4>
			<div class="poetry-container" style="">
				<div class="lgp">
					<!-- rend=';' -->
					<div class="stanza-outer">
						<p>Sternitur infelix alieno vulnere, cœlumque</p>
						<p>Adspicit et moriens dulces reminiscitur Argos.—<span class="it">Virgil.</span></p>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<!-- end poetry block -->
			<!-- end rend -->
			<p>
				<span style="font-size:smaller">He falls, unhappy, by a wound intended for another; looks up to the skies, and dying remembers sweet Argos.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
