<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Dictionary</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="glossary" epub:type="glossary">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Dictionary</h2>
			<section id="glossary-a">
				<h3 epub:type="title">A</h3>
				<dl>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Abdalrahman</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ab-dal-rahˈman), founder of the independent Ommiad (Saracenic) power in Spain, conquered at Tours by Charles Martel.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Aberfraw</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Abˈer-fraw), scene of nuptials of Branwen and Matholch.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Absyrtus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ab-syrˈtus), younger brother of Medea.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Abydos</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(A-byˈdos), a town on the Hellespont, nearly opposite to Sestos.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Abyla</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Abˈy-la), Mount, or Columna, a mountain in Morocco, near Ceuta, now called Jebel Musa or Ape’s Hill, forming the Northwestern extremity of the African coast opposite Gibraltar (See Pillars of Hercules).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Acestes</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(A-cesˈtes), son of a Trojan woman who was sent by her father to Sicily, that she might not be devoured by the monsters which infested the territory of Troy.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Acetes</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(A-ceˈtes), Bacchanal captured by Pentheus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Achates</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(A-chaˈtes), faithful friend and companion of Aeneas.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Achelous</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ach-e-loˈus), river-god of the largest river in Greece⁠—his Horn of Plenty.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Achilles</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(A-chilˈles), the hero of the Iliad, son of Peleus and of the Nereid Thetis, slain by Paris.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Acis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Aˈcis), youth loved by Galatea and slain by Polyphemus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Acontius</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(A-conˈti-us), a beautiful youth, who fell in love with Cydippe, the daughter of a noble Athenian.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Acrisius</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(A-crisˈi-us), son of Abas, king of Argos, grandson of Lynceus, the great-grandson of Danaüs.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Actaeon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ac-taeˈon), a celebrated huntsman, son of Aristaeus and Autonoë, who, having seen Diana bathing, was changed by her to a stag and killed by his own dogs.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Admeta</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ad-meˈta), daughter of Eurystheus, covets Hippolyta’s girdle.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Admetus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ad-meˈtus), king of Thessaly, saved from death by Alcestis.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Adonis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(A-doˈnis), a youth beloved by Aphrodite (Venus), and Proserpine; killed by a boar.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Adrastus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(A-drasˈtus), a king of Argos.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Aeacus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Aeˈa-cus), son of Zeus (Jupiter) and Aegina, renowned in all Greece for his justice and piety.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Aeaea</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ae-aeˈa), Circe’s island, visited by Ulysses.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Aeetes</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ae-eˈtes), or Aeeta, son of Helios (the Sun) and Perseis, and father of Medea and Absyrtus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Aegean Sea</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ae-geˈan Sea).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Aegeus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ae-geˈus), king of Athens.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Aegina</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ae-giˈna), a rocky island in the middle of the Saronic gulf.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Aegis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Aeˈgis), shield or breastplate of Jupiter and Minerva.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Aegisthus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ae-gisˈthus), murderer of Agamemnon, slain by Orestes.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Aeneas</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ae-neˈas), Trojan hero, son of Anchises and Aphrodite (Venus), and born on Mount Ida, reputed first settler of Rome.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Aeneid</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ae-neˈid), poem by Virgil, relating the wanderings of Aeneas from Troy to Italy.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Aeolus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Aeˈo-lus), son of Hellen and the nymph Orseis, represented in Homer as the happy ruler of the Aeolian Islands, to whom Zeus had given dominion over the winds.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Aesculapius</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Aesˈcu-laˈpi-us), god of the medical art.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Aeson</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Aeˈson), father of Jason, made young again by Medea.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Aethiopians</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ae-thi-oˈpi-ans), inhabitants of the country south of Egypt.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Aethra</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Aeˈthra), mother of Theseus by Aegeus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Aetna</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Aetˈna), volcano in Sicily.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Agamedes</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Agˈa-meˈdes), brother of Trophonius, distinguished as an architect.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Agamemnon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Agˈa-memˈnon), son of Plisthenis and grandson of Atreus, king of Mycenae; although the chief commander of the Greeks, is not the hero of the Iliad, and in chivalrous spirit altogether inferior to Achilles.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Agave</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(A-gaˈve), daughter of Cadmus, wife of Echion, and mother of Pentheus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Agenor</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(A-geˈnor), father of Europa, Cadmus, Cilix, and Phoenix.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Aglaia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ag-laˈi-a), one of the Graces.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Agni</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Agˈni), Hindu god of fire.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Agramant</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Agˈra-mant), a king in Africa.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Agrican</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Agˈri-can), fabled king of Tartary, pursuing Angelica, finally killed by Orlando.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Agrivain</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Agˈri-vain), one of Arthur’s knights.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ahriman</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ahˈri-man), the Evil Spirit in the dual system of Zoroaster. See Ormuzd.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ajax</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Aˈjax), son of Telamon, king of Salamis, and grandson of Aeacus; represented in the Iliad as second only to Achilles in bravery.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Alba</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Alˈba), the river where King Arthur fought the Romans.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Alba Longa</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Alˈba Lonˈga), city in Italy founded by son of Aeneas.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Alberich</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Alˈber-ich), dwarf guardian of Rhinegold treasure of the Nibelungs.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Albracca</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Al-bracˈca), siege of.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Alcestis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Al-cesˈtis), wife of Admetus, offered herself as sacrifice to spare her husband, but rescued by Hercules.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Alcides Hercules</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Al-ciˈdes (Hercules)).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Alcina</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Al-ciˈna), enchantress.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Alcinous</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Al-cinˈo-us), Phaeacian king.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Alcippe</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Al-cipˈpe), daughter of Mars; carried off by Halirrhothius.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Alcmena</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Alc-meˈna), wife of Jupiter, and mother of Hercules.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Alcuin</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Alˈcu-in), English prelate and scholar.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Aldrovandus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Al-dro-vanˈdus), dwarf guardian of treasure.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Alecto</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(A-lecˈto), one of the Furies.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Alexander the Great</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Al-ex-anˈder the Great), king of Macedonia, conqueror of Greece, Egypt, Persia, Babylonia, and India.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Alfadur</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Al-faˈdur), a name for Odin.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Alfheim</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Alfˈheim), abode of the elves of light.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Alice</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Alˈice), mother of Huon and Girard, sons of Duke Sevinus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Alphenor</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Al-pheˈnor), son of Niobe.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Alpheus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Al-pheˈus), river-god pursuing Arethusa, who escaped by being changed to a fountain.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Althaea</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Al-thaeˈa), mother of Meleager, whom she slew because he had in a quarrel killed her brothers, thus disgracing “the house of Thestius,” her father.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Amalthea</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Am-al-theˈa), nurse of the infant Jupiter in Crete.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Amata</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(A-maˈta), wife of Latinus, driven mad by Alecto.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Amaury of Hauteville</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Amˈau-ry of Hauteville), false-hearted Knight of Charlemagne.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Amazons</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Amˈa-zons), mythical race of warlike women.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ambrosia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Am-broˈsi-a), celestial food used by the gods.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ammon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Amˈmon), Egyptian god of life, identified by Romans with phases of Jupiter, the father of gods.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Amphiaraus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Am-phi-a-raˈus), a great prophet and hero at Argos.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Amphion</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Am-phiˈon), a musician, son of Jupiter and Antiope (See Dirce).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Amphitrite</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Am-phi-triˈte), wife of Neptune.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Amphyrsos</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Am-phyrˈsos), a small river in Thessaly.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ampyx</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Amˈpyx), assailant of Perseus, turned to stone by seeing Gorgon’s head.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Amrita</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Am-riˈta), nectar giving immortality.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Amun</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Aˈmun), See Ammon.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Amymone</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Amˈy-moˈne), one of the fifty daughters of Danaüs, and mother by Poseidon (Neptune) of Nauplius, the father of Palamedes.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Anaxarete</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Anˈax-arˈe-te), a maiden of Cyprus, who treated her lover Iphis with such haughtiness that he hanged himself at her door.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Anbessa</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(An-bessˈa), Saracenic governor of Spain (725 <abbr class="era">AD</abbr>).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Anceus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(An-ceˈus), one of the Argonauts.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Anchises</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(An-chiˈses), beloved by Aphrodite (Venus), by whom he became the father of Aeneas.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Andraemon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(An-draeˈmon), husband of Dryope; saw her changed into a tree.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Andret</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Anˈdret), a cowardly knight, spy upon Tristram.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Andromache</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(An-dromˈa-che), wife of Hector.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Andromeda</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(An-dromˈe-da), daughter of King Cephas, delivered from monster by Perseus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Aneurin</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Anˈeur-in), Welsh bard.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Angelica</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(An-gelˈi-ca), Princess of Cathay.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Anemone</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(A-nemˈo-ne), short-lived windflower, created by Venus from the blood of the slain Adonis.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Angerbode</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(An-gerˈbo-de), giant prophetess, mother of Fenris, Hela, and the Midgard Serpent.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Anglesey</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Anˈgle-sey), a Northern British island, refuge of Druids fleeing from Romans.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Antaeus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(An-taeˈus), giant wrestler of Libya, killed by Hercules, who, finding him stronger when thrown to the earth, lifted him into the air and strangled him.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Antea</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(An-teˈa), wife of jealous Proetus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Antenor</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(An-teˈnor), descendants of, in Italy.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Anteros</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Anˈte-ros), deity avenging unrequited love, brother of Eros (Cupid).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Anthor</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Anˈthor), a Greek.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Antigone</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(An-tigˈo-ne), daughter of Aedipus, Greek ideal of filial and sisterly fidelity.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Antilochus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(An-tilˈo-chus), son of Nestor.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Antiope</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(An-tiˈo-pe), Amazonian queen. See Dirce.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Anubis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(A-nuˈbis), Egyptian god, conductor of the dead to judgment.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Apennines</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Apˈen-nines).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Aphrodite See Venus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Aph-ro-diˈte. See Venus), Dione, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Apis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Aˈpis), Egyptian bull-god of Memphis.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Apollo</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(A-polˈlo), god of music and song.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Apollo Belvedere</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(A-polˈlo Bel-ve-dereˈ), famous antique statue in Vatican at Rome.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Apollo</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(A-polˈlo), Oracle of.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Apollo</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(A-polˈlo), temple to.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Apples of the Hesperides</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Apples of the Hesperides), wedding gifts to Juno, guarded by daughters of Atlas and Hesperis, stolen by Atlas for Hercules.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Aquilo</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Aqˈui-lo), or Boreas, the North Wind.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Aquitaine</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Aqˈui-taine), ancient province of Southwestern France.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Arachne</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(A-rachˈne), a maiden skilled in weaving, changed to a spider by Minerva for daring to compete with her.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Arcadia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ar-caˈdi-a), a country in the middle of Peloponnesus, surrounded on all sides by mountains.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Arcady</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Arˈca-dy), star of, the Polestar.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Arcas</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Arˈcas), son of Jupiter and Callisto.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Archer</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Archer), constellation of the.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Arden</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Arˈden), forest of.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Areopagus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(A-re-opˈa-gus), court of the, at Athens.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ares</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Aˈres), called Mars by the Romans, the Greek god of war, and one of the great Olympian gods.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Arethusa</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ar-e-thuˈsa), nymph of Diana, changed to a fountain.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Argius</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Arˈgius), king of Ireland, father of Isoude the Fair.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Argo</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Arˈgo), builder of the vessel of Jason for the Argonautic expedition.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Argolis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Arˈgo-lis), city of the Nemean games.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Argonauts</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Arˈgo-nauts), Jason’s crew seeking the Golden Fleece.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Argos</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Arˈgos), a kingdom in Greece.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Argus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Arˈgus), of the hundred eyes, guardian of Io.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ariadne</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(A-ri-adˈne), daughter of King Minos, who helped Theseus slay the Minotaur.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Arimanes</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(A-rimˈa-nes), See Ahriman.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Arimaspians</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Arˈi-masˈpi-ans), one-eyed people of Syria.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Arion</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(A-riˈon), famous musician, whom sailors cast into the sea to rob him, but whose lyric song charmed the dolphins, one of which bore him safely to land.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Aristaeus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ar-is-taeˈus), the beekeeper, in love with Eurydice.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Armorica</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ar-morˈi-ca), another name for Britain.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Arridano</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ar-ri-daˈno), a magical ruffian, slain by Orlando.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Artemis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Arˈte-mis), See Diana.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Arthgallo</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Arth-galˈlo), brother of Elidure, British king.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Arthur</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Arˈthur), king in Britain about the 6th century.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Aruns</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Aˈruns), an Etruscan who killed Camilla.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Asgard</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Asˈgard), home of the Northern gods.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ashtaroth</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ashˈta-roth), a cruel spirit, called by enchantment to bring Rinaldo to death.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Asia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Aˈsia).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Aske</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Asˈke), the first man, made from an ash tree.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Astolpho of England</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(As-tolˈpho of England), one of Charlemagne’s knights.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Astraea</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(As-traeˈa), goddess of justice, daughter of Astraeus and Eos.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Astyages</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(As-tyˈa-ges), an assailant of Perseus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Astyanax</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(As-tyˈa-nax), son of Hector of Troy, established kingdom of Messina in Italy.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Asuras</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(A-suˈras), opponents of the Braminical gods.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Atalanta</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(At-a-lanˈta), beautiful daughter of King of Icaria, loved and won in a footrace by Hippomenes.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ate</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Aˈte), the goddess of infatuation, mischief and guilt.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Athamas</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Athˈa-mas), son of Aeolus and Enarete, and king of Orchomenus, in Boeotia. See Ino.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Athene</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(A-theˈne), tutelary goddess of Athens; the same as Minerva.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Athens</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Athˈens), the capital of Attica, about four miles from the sea, between the small rivers Cephissus and Ilissus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Athor</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Aˈthor), Egyptian deity, progenitor of Isis and Osiris.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Athos</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Aˈthos), the mountainous peninsula, also called Acte, which projects from Chalcidice in Macedonia.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Atlantes</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(At-lanˈtes), foster-father of Rogero, a powerful magician.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Atlantis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(At-lanˈtis), according to an ancient tradition, a great island west of the Pillars of Hercules, in the ocean, opposite Mount Atlas.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Atlas</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Atˈlas), a Titan, who bore the heavens on his shoulders, as punishment for opposing the gods; one of the sons of Iapetus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Atlas</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Atˈlas), Mount, general name for range in northern Africa.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Atropos</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Atˈro-pos), one of the Fates (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Attica</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Atˈti-ca), a state in ancient Greece.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Audhumbla</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Aud-humˈbla), the cow from which the giant Ymir was nursed. Her milk was frost melted into raindrops.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Augean stables</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Au-geˈan stables), cleansed by Hercules.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Augeas</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Au-geˈas), king of Elis.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Augustan age</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Au-gusˈtan age), reign of Roman Emperor Augustus Caesar, famed for many great authors.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Augustus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Au-gusˈtus), the first imperial Caesar, who ruled the Roman Empire 31 <abbr class="era">BC</abbr>−14 <abbr class="era">AD</abbr>.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Aulis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Auˈlis), port in Boeotia, meeting-place of Greek expedition against Troy.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Aurora</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Au-roˈra), identical with Eos, goddess of the dawn.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Aurora Borealis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Au-roˈra Bo-re-aˈlis), splendid nocturnal luminosity in northern sky, called Northern Lights, probably electrical.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Autumn</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Auˈtumn), attendant of Phoebus, the Sun.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Avalon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Avˈa-lon), land of the Blessed, an earthly paradise in the Western Seas, burial-place of King Arthur.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Avatar</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Avˈa-tar), name for any of the earthly incarnations of Vishnu, the Preserver (Hindu god).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Aventine</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Avˈen-tine), Mount, one of the Seven Hills of Rome.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Avernus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(A-verˈnus), a miasmatic lake close to the promontory between Cumae and Puteoli, filling the crater of an extinct volcano, by the ancients thought to be the entrance to the infernal regions.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Avicenna</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Av-i-cenˈna), celebrated Arabian physician and philosopher.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Aya</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Aˈya), mother of Rinaldo.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Aymon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ayˈmon), Duke, father of Rinaldo and Bradamante.</p>
					</dd>
				</dl>
			</section>
			<section id="glossary-b">
				<h3 epub:type="title">B</h3>
				<dl>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Baal</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Baˈal), king of Tyre.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Babylonian River</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Bab-y-loˈni-an River), dried up when Phaëton drove the sun-chariot.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Bacchanalia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Bacˈcha-naˈli-a), a feast to Bacchus that was permitted to occur but once in three years; attended by most shameless orgies.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Bacchanals</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Bacˈcha-nals), devotees and festal dancers of Bacchus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Bacchus Dionysus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Bacˈchus (Dionysus)), god of wine and revelry.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Badon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Baˈdon), battle of, Arthur’s final victory over the Saxons.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Bagdemagus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Bag-de-maˈgus), King, a knight of Arthur’s time.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Baldur</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Balˈdur), son of Odin, and representing in Norse mythology the sun-god.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Balisardo</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Bal-i-sarˈdo), Orlando’s sword.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ban</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ban), King of Brittany, ally of Arthur, father of Launcelot.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Bards</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Bards), minstrels of Welsh Druids.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Basilisk</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Basˈi-lisk), See Cockatrice.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Baucis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Bauˈcis), wife of Philemon, visited by Jupiter and Mercury.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Bayard</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Bayˈard), wild horse subdued by Rinaldo.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Beal</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Beˈal), Druids’ god of life.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Bear Constellation of</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Bear (Constellation of)).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Bedivere</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Bedˈi-vere), Arthur’s knight.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Bedver</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Bedˈver), King Arthur’s butler, made governor of Normandy.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Bedwyr</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Bedˈwyr), knightly comrade of Geraint.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Belisarda</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Bel-i-sarˈda), Rogero’s sword.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Bellerophon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Bel-lerˈo-phon), demigod, conqueror of the Chimaera.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Bellona</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Bel-loˈna), the Roman goddess of war, represented as the sister or wife of Mars.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Beltane</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Belˈtane), Druidical fire-festival.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Belus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Beˈlus), son of Poseidon (Neptune) and Libya or Eurynome, twin brother of Agenor.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Bendigeid Vran</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Benˈdi-geid Vran), King of Britain.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Beowulf</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Beˈo-wulf), hero and king of the Swedish Geats.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Beroe</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Berˈo-e), nurse of Semele.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Bertha</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Berˈtha), mother of Orlando.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Bifrost</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Biˈfrost), rainbow bridge between the earth and Asgard (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Bladud</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Blaˈdud), inventor, builder of the city of Bath.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Blamor</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Blaˈmor), a knight of Arthur.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Bleoberis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ble-obˈer-is), a knight of Arthur.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Boeotia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Boe-oˈti-a), state in ancient Greece, capital city Thebes.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Bohort</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Bo-hortˈ), King, a knight of Arthur.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Bona Dea</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Boˈna Deˈa), a Roman divinity of fertility.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Bootes</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Bo-oˈtes), also called Arcas, son of Jupiter and Calisto, changed to constellation of Ursa Major.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Boreas</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Boˈre-as), North wind, son of Aeolus and Aurora.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Bosporus Bosphorus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Bosˈpo-rus (Bosphorus)), the Cow-ford, named for Io (which see), when as a heifer she crossed that strait.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Bradamante</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Brad-a-manˈte), sister to Rinaldo; a female warrior.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Brademagus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Brad-e-maˈgus), King, father of Sir Maleagans.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Bragi</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Bragˈi), Norse god of poetry.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Brahma</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Brahˈma), the Creator, chief god of Hindu religion.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Branwen</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Branˈwen), daughter of Llyr, King of Britain, wife of Matholch.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Brazen Age</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Brazen Age).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Brciliande</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Bré-cilˈi-ande), forest of, where Vivian enticed Merlin.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Brengwain</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Brengˈwain), maid of Isoude the Fair.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Brennus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Brenˈnus), son of Molmutius, went to Gaul, became King of the Allobroges.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Breuse</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Breuse), the Pitiless, a caitiff knight.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Briareus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Bri-aˈre-us), hundred-armed giant.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Brice</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Brice), Bishop, sustainer of Arthur when elected king.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Brigliadoro</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Brig-li-a-doˈro), Orlando’s horse.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Briseis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Bri-seˈis), captive maid belonging to Achilles.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Britto</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Britˈto), reputed ancestor of British people.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Bruhier</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Bruhˈier), Sultan of Arabia.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Brunello</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Bru-nelˈlo), dwarf, thief, and king.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Brunhild</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Brunˈhild), leader of the Valkyrie.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Brutus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Bruˈtus), great-grandson of Aeneas, and founder of city of New Troy (London). See Pandrasus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Bryan</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Bryˈan), Sir, a knight of Arthur.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Buddha</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Budˈdha), called The Enlightened, reformer of Brahmanism, deified teacher of self-abnegation, virtue, reincarnation, Karma (inevitable sequence of every act), and Nirvana (beatific absorption into the Divine), lived about 562⁠–⁠482 <abbr class="era">BC</abbr>.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Bull</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Bull), constellation.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Byblos</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Bybˈlos), in Egypt.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Byrsa</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Byrˈsa), original site of Carthage.</p>
					</dd>
				</dl>
			</section>
			<section id="glossary-c">
				<h3 epub:type="title">C</h3>
				<dl>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cacus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Caˈcus), gigantic son of Vulcan, slain by Hercules, whose captured cattle he stole.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cadmus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cadˈmus), son of Agenor, king of Phoenicia, and of Telephassa, and brother of Europa, who, seeking his sister, carried off by Jupiter, had strange adventures⁠—sowing in the ground teeth of a dragon he had killed, which sprang up armed men who slew each other, all but five, who helped Cadmus to found the city of Thebes.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Caduceus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ca-duˈce-us), Mercury’s staff.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cadwallo</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cad-walˈlo), King of Venedotia (North Wales).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Caerleon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Caer-leˈon), traditional seat of Arthur’s court.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Caesar</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Caeˈsar), Julius, Roman lawyer, general, statesman and author, conquered and consolidated Roman territory, making possible the Empire.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Caicus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ca-iˈcus), a Greek river.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cairns</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cairns), Druidical stone-piles.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Calais</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Calˈais), French town facing England.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Calchas</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Calˈchas), wisest soothsayer among the Greeks at Troy.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Caliburn</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Calˈi-burn), a sword of Arthur.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Calliope</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cal-liˈo-pe), one of the nine Muses (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Callisto</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cal-lisˈto), an Arcadian nymph, mother of Arcas (See Boötes), changed by Jupiter to constellation Ursa Minor.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Calpe</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Calˈpe), a mountain in the south of Spain, on the strait between the Atlantic and Mediterranean, now Rock of Gibraltar.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Calydon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Calˈy-don), home of Meleager.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Calypso</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ca-lypˈso), queen of Island of Ogyia, where Ulysses was wrecked and held seven years.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Calypso Island</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ca-lypˈso Island).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Camber</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Camˈber), son of Brutus, governor of West Albion (Wales).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cambria</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Camˈbria).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Camelot</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Camˈe-lot), legendary place in England where Arthur’s court and palace were located.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Camenae</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ca-meˈnae), prophetic nymphs, belonging to the religion of ancient Italy.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Camilla</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ca-milˈla), Volscian maiden, huntress and Amazonian warrior, favorite of Diana.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Camlan</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Camˈlan), battle of, where Arthur was mortally wounded.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Canterbury</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Canˈter-bury), English city.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Capaneus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Capˈa-neus), husband of Evadne, slain by Jupiter for disobedience.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Capet</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Caˈpet), Hugh, King of France (987⁠–⁠996 <abbr class="era">AD</abbr>).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Caradoc Briefbras</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Carˈa-doc Briefˈbras), Sir, great-nephew of King Arthur.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Carahue</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Carˈa-hue), King of Mauretania.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Carthage</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Carˈthage), African city, home of Dido (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cassandra</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cas-sanˈdra), daughter of Priam and Hecuba, and twin-sister of Helenus, a prophetess, who foretold the coming of the Greeks but was not believed.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cassibellaunus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cas-si-bel-launˈus), British chieftain, fought but not conquered by Caesar.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cassiopeia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cas-si-o-peˈia), mother of Andromeda.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Castalia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cas-taˈli-a), fountain of Parnassus, giving inspiration to Oracular priestess named Pythia.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Castalian Cave</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cas-taˈlian Cave), oracle of Apollo.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Castes India</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Castes (India)).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Castor and Polluxthe Dioscuri</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Casˈtor and Polˈlux⁠—the Dioscuri), sons of Jupiter and Leda⁠—Castor a horseman, Pollux a boxer (See Gemini).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Caucasus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cauˈca-sus), Mount.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cavall</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ca-vallˈ), Arthur’s favorite dog.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cayster</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ca-ysˈter), ancient river.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cebriones</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ce-briˈo-nes), Hector’s charioteer.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cecrops</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ceˈcrops), first king of Athens.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Celestials</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ce-lesˈtials), gods of classic mythology.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Celeus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ceˈle-us), shepherd who sheltered Ceres, seeking Proserpine, and whose infant son Triptolemus was in gratitude made great by Ceres.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cellini</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cel-liˈni), Benvenuto, famous Italian sculptor and artificer in metals.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Celtic nations</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Celtˈic nations), ancient Gauls and Britons, modern Bretons, Welsh, Irish and Gaelic Scotch.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Centaurs</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cenˈtaurs), originally an ancient race, inhabiting Mount Pelion in Thessaly; in later accounts represented as half horses and half men, and said to have been the offspring of Ixion and a cloud.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cephalus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cephˈa-lus), husband of beautiful but jealous Procris.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cepheus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ceˈphe-us), King of Ethiopians, father of Andromeda.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cephisus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cephˈi-sus), a Grecian stream.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cerberus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cerˈbe-rus), three-headed dog that guarded the entrance to Hades; called a son of Typhaon and Echidna.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ceres See Demeter</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ceˈres (See Demeter)).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cestus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cesˈtus), the girdle of Venus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ceylon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cey-lonˈ).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ceyx</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ceˈyx), King of Thessaly (See Halcyone).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Chaos</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Chaˈos), original Confusion, personified by Greeks as most ancient of the gods.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Charlemagne</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Charˈle-magne), king of the Franks and emperor of the Romans.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Charles Martel</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Charles Mar-telˈ), king of the Franks, grandfather of Charlemagne, called Martel (the Hammer) from his defeat of the Saracens at Tours.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Charlot</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Charˈlot), son of Charlemagne.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Charon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Chaˈron), son of Erebos, conveyed in his boat the shades of the dead across the rivers of the lower world.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Charybdis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cha-rybˈdis), whirlpool near the coast of Sicily. See Scylla.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Chimaera</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Chi-maeˈra), a fire-breathing monster, the fore part of whose body was that of a lion, the hind part that of a dragon, and the middle that of a goat, slain by Bellerophon.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>China</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Chiˈna), Lamas (priests) of.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Chios</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Chiˈos), island in the Grecian archipelago.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Chiron</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Chiˈron), wisest of all the Centaurs, son of Cronos (Saturn) and Philyra, lived on Mount Pelion, instructor of Grecian heroes.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Chryseis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Chry-seˈis), Trojan maid, taken by Agamemnon.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Chryses</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Chryˈses), priest of Apollo, father of Chryseis.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ciconians</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ci-coˈni-ans), inhabitants of Ismarus, visited by Ulysses.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cimbri</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cimˈbri), an ancient people of Central Europe.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cimmeria</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cim-meˈri-a), a land of darkness.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cimon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ciˈmon), Athenian general.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Circe</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cirˈce), sorceress, sister of Aeetes.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cithaeron</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ci-thaeˈron), Mount, scene of Bacchic worship.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Clarimunda</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Clar-i-munˈda), wife of Huon.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Clio</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cliˈo), one of the Muses (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cloridan</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Clorˈi-dan), a Moor.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Clotho</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cloˈtho), one of the Fates (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Clymene</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Clymˈe-ne), an ocean nymph.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Clytemnestra</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cly-tem-nesˈtra), wife of Agamemnon, killed by Orestes.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Clytie</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Clyˈtie), a water-nymph, in love with Apollo.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cnidos</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cniˈdos), ancient city of Asia Minor, seat of worship of Aphrodite (Venus).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cockatrice or Basilisk</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cockˈa-trice (or Basilisk)), called King of Serpents, supposed to kill with its look.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cocytus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Co-cyˈtus), a river of Hades.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Colchis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Colˈchis), a kingdom east of the Black Sea.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Colophon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Colˈo-phon), one of the seven cities claiming the birth of Homer.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Columba</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Co-lumˈba), <abbr>St.</abbr>, an Irish Christian missionary to Druidical parts of Scotland.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Conan</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Coˈnan), Welsh king.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Constantine</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Conˈstan-tine), Greek emperor.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cordeilla</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cor-deilˈla), daughter of the mythical King Leir.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Corineus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Co-ri-neˈus), a Trojan warrior in Albion.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Corinth</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Corˈinth), city and isthmus of.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cornucopia of Achelous</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cor-nu-coˈpi-a of Achelous).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cornwall</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cornˈwall), southwest part of Britain.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cortana</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cor-taˈna), Ogier’s sword.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Corybantes</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cor-y-banˈtes), priests of Cybele, or Rhea, in Phrygia, who celebrated her worship with dances, to the sound of the drum and the cymbal.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Crab</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Crab), constellation.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cranes and their enemies</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cranes and their enemies), the Pygmies of Ibycus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Creon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Creˈon), king of Thebes.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Crete</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Crete), one of the largest islands of the Mediterranean Sea, lying south of the Cyclades.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Creusa</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cre-uˈsa), daughter of Priam, wife of Aeneas.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Crocale</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Crocˈa-le), a nymph of Diana.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cromlech</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cromˈlech), Druidical altar.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cronos</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Croˈnos), See Saturn.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Crotona</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cro-toˈna), city of Italy.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cuchulain</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cu-chuˈlain), Irish hero, called the “Hound of Ireland,” -.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Culdees</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cul-deesˈ), followers of <abbr>St.</abbr> Columba.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cumaean Sibyl</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cu-maeˈan Sibyl), seeress of Cumae, consulted by Aeneas, sold Sibylline books to Tarquin.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cupid</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cuˈpid), child of Venus and god of love.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Curoi of Kerry</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cu-roi of Kerry), wise man.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cyane</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cyˈa-ne), river, opposed Pluto’s passage to Hades.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cybele Rhea</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cybˈe-le (Rhea), which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cyclopes</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cy-cloˈpes), creatures with circular eyes, of whom Homer speaks as a gigantic and lawless race of shepherds in Sicily, who devoured human beings; they helped Vulcan to forge the thunderbolts of Zeus under Aetna.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cymbeline</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cymˈbe-line), king of ancient Britain.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cynosure Dogs tail</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cyˈno-sure (Dog’s tail)), the Polestar, at tail of Constellation Ursa Minor.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cynthian mountain top</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cynˈthi-an mountain top), birthplace of Artemis (Diana) and Apollo.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cyprus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cyˈprus), island off the coast of Syria, sacred to Aphrodite.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Cyrene</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Cy-reˈne), a nymph, mother of Aristaeus.</p>
					</dd>
				</dl>
			</section>
			<section id="glossary-d">
				<h3 epub:type="title">D</h3>
				<dl>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Daedalus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Daeˈda-lus), architect of the Cretan Labyrinth; inventor of sails.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Daguenet</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Dagˈue-net), King Arthur’s fool.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Dalai Lama</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Daˈlai Laˈma), chief pontiff of Thibet.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Danae</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Danˈa-e), mother of Perseus by Jupiter.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Danaides</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Da-naˈi-des), the fifty daughters of Danaüs, king of Argos, who were betrothed to the fifty sons of Aegyptus, but were commanded by their father to slay each her own husband on the marriage night.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Danaus See Danaides</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Danˈa-us (See Danaides)).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Daphne</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Daphˈne), maiden loved by Apollo, and changed into a laurel tree.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Dardanelles</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Dar-da-nellesˈ), ancient Hellespont (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Dardanus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Darˈda-nus), progenitor of the Trojan kings.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Dardinel</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Darˈdi-nel), prince of Zumara.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Dawn</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Dawn), See Aurora.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Day</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Day), an attendant on Phoebus, the Sun.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Daystar Hesperus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Daystar (Hesperus)).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Death</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Death), See Hela.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Deiphobus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(De-iphˈo-bus), son of Priam and Hecuba, the bravest brother of Paris.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Dejanira</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Deˈja-niˈra), wife of Hercules.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Delos</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Deˈlos), floating island, birthplace of Apollo and Diana.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Delphi</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Delˈphi), shrine of Apollo, famed for its oracles.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Delphos</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Delˈphos).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Demeter</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(De-meˈter), Greek goddess of marriage and human fertility; identified by Romans with Ceres (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Demetia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(De-meˈti-a), South Wales.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Demodocus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(De-modˈo-cus), bard of Alcinoüs, king of the Phaeacians.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Deucalion</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Deu-caˈli-on), king of Thessaly, who with his wife Pyrrha were the only pair surviving a deluge sent by Zeus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Dia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Diˈa), island of.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Diana Artemis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Di-aˈna (Artemis)), goddess of the moon and of the chase, daughter of Jupiter and Latona.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Diana of the Hind</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Di-aˈna of the Hind), antique sculpture in the Louvre, Paris.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Diana</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Di-aˈna), temple of.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Dictys</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Dicˈtys), a sailor.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Didier</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Didˈi-er), king of the Lombards.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Dido</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Diˈdo), queen of Tyre and Carthage, entertained the shipwrecked Aeneas.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Diomede</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Di-o-meˈde), Greek hero during Trojan War.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Dione</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Di-oˈne), female Titan, mother of Zeus, of Aphrodite (Venus).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Dionysus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Di-o-nyˈsus), See Bacchus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Dioscuri</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Di-os-cuˈri), the Twins (See Castor and Pollux).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Dirce</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Dirˈce), wife of Lycus, king of Thebes, who ordered Amphion and Zethus to tie Antiope to a wild bull, but they, learning Antiope to be their mother, so treated Dirce herself.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Dis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Dis), See Pluto.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Discord</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Disˈcord), apple of. See Eris.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Discordia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Dis-corˈdi-a), See Eris.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Dodona</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Do-doˈna), site of an oracle of Zeus (Jupiter).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Dolphin</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Dolphin).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Dorceus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Dorˈce-us), a dog of Diana.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Doris</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Doˈris), wife of Nereus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Dragons teeth sown by Cadmus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Dragˈon’s teeth sown by Cadmus).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Druids</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Druˈids), ancient Celtic priests.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Dryades or Dryads</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Dryˈ-a-des (or Dryads)), See Wood-nymphs.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Dryope</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Dryˈo-pe), changed to a lotus plant, for plucking a lotus⁠—enchanted form of the nymph Lotis.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Dubricius</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Du-briˈci-us), bishop of Caerleon.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Dudon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Duˈdon), a knight, comrade of Astolpho.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Dunwallo Molmutius</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Dun-walˈlo Mol-muˈti-us), British king and lawgiver.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Durindana</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Du-rin-daˈna), sword of Orlando or Rinaldo.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Dwarfs in Wagners Nibelungen Ring</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Dwarfs in Wagner’s Nibelungen Ring).</p>
					</dd>
				</dl>
			</section>
			<section id="glossary-e">
				<h3 epub:type="title">E</h3>
				<dl>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Earth Gaea</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Earth (Gaea)), goddess of the Earth.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ebudians</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(E-buˈdi-ans), the.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Echo</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Echˈo), nymph of Diana, shunned by Narcissus, faded to nothing but a voice.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ecklenlied</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Eckˈlen-lied), the.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Eddas</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Edˈdas), Norse mythological records.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ederyn</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Edˈe-ryn), son of Nudd.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Egeria</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(E-geˈri-a), nymph of the Fountain.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Egypt</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Egypt).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Eisteddfod</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Eis-teddˈfod), session of Welsh bards and minstrels.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Electra</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(E-lecˈtra), the lost one of the Pleiades (which see); also, sister of Orestes (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Eleusinian Mysteries</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(El-eu-sinˈi-an Mysteries), instituted by Ceres, and calculated to awaken feelings of piety and a cheerful hope of better life in the future.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Eleusis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(E-leuˈsis), Grecian city.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Elgin Marbles</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Elˈgin Marbles), Greek sculptures from the Parthenon of Athens, now in British Museum, London, placed there by Lord Elgin.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Eliaures</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(E-li-auˈres), enchanter.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Elidure</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Elˈi-dure), a king of Britain.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Elis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Eˈlis), ancient Greek city.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Elli</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Elˈli), old age; the one successful wrestler against Thor.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Elphin</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Elˈphin), son of Gwyddno.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Elves</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Elves), spiritual beings, of many powers and dispositions⁠—some evil, some good.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Elvidnir</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(El-vidˈnir), the hall of Hela (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Elysian Fields</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(E-lysˈi-an Fields), the land of the blest.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Elysian Plain</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(E-lysˈi-an Plain), whither the favored of the gods were taken without death.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Elysium</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(E-lysˈi-um), a happy land, where there is neither snow, nor cold, nor rain. Hither favored heroes, like Menelaus, pass without dying, and live happy under the rule of Rhadamanthus. In the Latin poets Elysium is part of the lower world, and the residence of the shades of the blessed.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Embla</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Emˈbla), the first woman.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Enceladus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(En-celˈa-dus), giant defeated by Jupiter.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Endymion</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(En-dymˈi-on), a beautiful youth beloved by Diana.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Enid</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Eˈnid), wife of Geraint.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Enna</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Enˈna), vale of, home of Proserpine.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Enoch</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Eˈnoch), the patriarch.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Epidaurus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Epi-dauˈrus), a town in Argolis, on the Saronic gulf; chief seat of the worship of Aesculapius, whose temple was situated near the town.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Epimetheus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ep-i-meˈtheus), son of Iapetus; husband of Pandora; with his brother Prometheus took part in creation of man.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Epirus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(E-piˈrus), country to the west of Thessaly, lying along the Adriatic Sea.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Epopeus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(E-poˈpe-us), a sailor.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Erato</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Erˈa-to), one of the Muses (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Erbin of Cornwall</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Erˈbin of Cornwall), father of Geraint.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Erebus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Erˈe-bus), son of Chaos; region of darkness, entrance to Hades.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Eridanus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(E-ridˈa-nus), river.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Erinys pl Erinnyes</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(E-riˈnys (pl. E-rinˈny-es)), one of the Furies (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Eriphyle</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Erˈi-phyˈle), sister of Polynices, bribed to decide on war, in which her husband was slain.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Eris Discordia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Eˈris (Discordia)), goddess of discord. At the wedding of Peleus and Thetis, Eris being uninvited threw into the gathering an apple “For the Fairest,” which was claimed by Hera (Juno), Aphrodite (Venus) and Athena (Minerva). Paris, being called upon for judgment, awarded it to Aphrodite.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Erisichthon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Er-i-sichˈthon), an unbeliever, punished by famine.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Eros</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Eˈros), See Cupid.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Erytheia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Erˈy-theˈia), island.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Eryx</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Eˈryx), a mount, haunt of Venus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Esepus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(E-seˈpus), river in Paphlagonia.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Estrildis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Es-trilˈdis), wife of Locrine, supplanting divorced Guendolen.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Eteocles</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(E-teˈo-cles), son of Oedipus and Jocasta.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Etruscans</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(E-trusˈcans), ancient people of Italy.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Etzel</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Etˈzel), king of the Huns.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Euboic Sea</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Eu-boˈic Sea), where Hercules threw Lichas, who brought him the poisoned shirt of Nessus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Eude</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Eude), king of Aquitaine, ally of Charles Martel.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Eumaeus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Eu-maeˈus), swineherd of Aeneas.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Eumenides</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Eu-menˈi-des), also called Erinnyes, and by the Romans Furiae or Dirae, the Avenging Deities. See Furies.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Euphorbus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Eu-phorˈbus), a Trojan, killed by Menelaus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Euphrosyne</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Eu-phrosˈy-ne), one of the Graces (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Europa</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Eu-roˈpa), daughter of the Phoenician king Agenor, by Zeus the mother of Minos, Rhadamanthus, and Sarpedon.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Eurus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Euˈrus), the East wind.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Euryalus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Eu-ryˈa-lus), a gallant Trojan soldier, who with Nisus entered the Grecian camp, both being slain.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Eurydice</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Eu-rydˈi-ce), wife of Orpheus, who, fleeing from an admirer, was killed by a snake and borne to Tartarus, where Orpheus sought her and was permitted to bring her to earth if he would not look back at her following him; but he did, and she returned to the Shades.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Eurylochus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Eu-rylˈo-chus), a companion of Ulysses.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Eurynome</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Eu-rynˈo-me), female Titan, wife of Ophion (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Eurystheus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Eu-rysˈtheus), taskmaster of Hercules.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Eurytion</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Eu-rytˈi-on), a Centaur (See Hippodamia).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Euterpe</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Eu-terˈpe), Muse who presided over music.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Euxine Sea</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Euxˈine Sea).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Evadne</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(E-vadˈne), wife of Capaneus, who flung herself upon his funeral pile and perished with him.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Evander</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(E-vanˈder), Arcadian chief, befriending Aeneas in Italy.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Eve</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Eve).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Evnissyen</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Evˈniss-yen), quarrelsome brother of Branwen.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Excalibur</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ex-calˈi-bar), sword of King Arthur.</p>
					</dd>
				</dl>
			</section>
			<section id="glossary-f">
				<h3 epub:type="title">F</h3>
				<dl>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Fafner</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Fafˈner), a giant turned dragon, treasure-stealer; by the Solar Theory simply the Darkness who steals the day.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Falerina</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Fal-er-iˈna), an enchantress.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Famine</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Famˈine).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Fasolt</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Faˈsolt), a giant, brother of Fafner, and killed by him.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Fasti</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(“Fasˈti”), Ovid’s, a mythological poetic calendar.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Fata Morgana</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Faˈta Mor-gaˈna), a mirage.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Fates</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Fates), the three, described as daughters of Night⁠—to indicate the darkness and obscurity of human destiny⁠—or of Zeus and Themis, that is, “daughters of the just heavens:” they were Cloˈtho, who spun the thread of life; Lachˈe-sis, who held the thread and fixed its length, and Atˈro-pos, who cut it off.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Fauns</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Fauns), cheerful sylvan deities, represented in human form, with small horns, pointed ears, and sometimes goat’s tail.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Faunus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Fauˈnus), son of Picus, grandson of Saturnus, and father of Latinus, worshipped as the protecting deity of agriculture and of shepherds, and also as a giver of oracles.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Favonius</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Fa-voˈni-us), the West wind.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Fear</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Fear).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Fenris</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Fenˈris), a wolf, the son of Loki the Evil Principle of Scandinavia; supposed to have personated the element of fire, destructive except when chained.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Fensalir</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Fen-saˈlir), Freya’s palace, called the Hall of the Sea, where were brought together lovers, husbands, and wives who had been separated by death.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ferragus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ferˈra-gus), a giant, opponent of Orlando.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ferrau</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ferˈrau), one of Charlemagne’s knights.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ferrex</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ferˈrex), brother of Porrex, the two sons of Leir.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Fireworshippers</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Fire-worshippers), of ancient Persia. See Parsees.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Flollo</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Flol-lo), Roman tribune in Gaul.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Flora</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Floˈra), Roman goddess of flowers and spring.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Flordelis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Flor-deˈlis), fair maiden beloved by Florismart.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Florismart</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Florˈis-mart), Sir, a brave knight.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Flosshilda</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Floss-hilˈda), one of the Rhine daughters (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Fortunate Fields</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Fortunate Fields).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Fortunate Islands See Elysian Plain</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Fortunate Islands (See Elysian Plain)).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Forum</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Foˈrum), marketplace and open square for public meetings in Rome, surrounded by courthouses, palaces, temples, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Francus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Franˈcus), son of Histion, grandson of Japhet, great-grandson of Noah, legendary ancestor of the Franks, or French.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Freki</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Freˈki), one of Odin’s two wolves.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>French language</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(French language).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Frey</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Frey), or Freyr, god of the sun.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Freya</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Freyˈa), Norse goddess of music, spring, and flowers.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Fricka</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Frickˈa), goddess of marriage.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Frigga</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Frigˈga), goddess who presided over smiling nature, sending sunshine, rain, and harvest.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Froh</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Froh), one of the Norse gods.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Frontino</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Fron-tiˈno), Rogero’s horse.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Frost Giants</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Frost Giants).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Fulla</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Fulˈla).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Furies Erinnyes</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Fuˈries (Erinnyes)), the three retributive spirits who punished crime, represented as snaky-haired old woman, named Alecto, Megaera, and Tisiphone.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Fusberta</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Fus-berˈta), Rinaldo’s sword.</p>
					</dd>
				</dl>
			</section>
			<section id="glossary-g">
				<h3 epub:type="title">G</h3>
				<dl>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gaea</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gaeˈa), or Ge, called Tellus by the Romans, the personification of the earth; described as the first being that sprang from Chaos, and gave birth to Uranus (Heaven) and Pontus (Sea).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gahariet</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ga-haˈri-et), knight of Arthur’s court.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gaheris</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ga-heˈris), knight.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Galafron</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Galˈa-fron), King of Cathay, father of Angelica.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Galahad</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Galˈa-had), Sir, the pure knight of Arthur’s Round Table, who safely took the Siege Perilous (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Galatea</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gal-a-teˈa), a Nereid or sea-nymph.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Galatea</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gal-a-teˈa), statue carved and beloved by Pygmalion.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Galen</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gaˈlen), Greek physician and philosophical writer.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gallehant</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Galˈle-hant), King of the Marches.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Games</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Games), national athletic contests in Greece⁠—Olympian, at Olympia; Pythian, near Delphi, seat of Apollo’s oracle; Isthmian, on the Corinthian Isthmus; Nemean, at Nemea in Argolis.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gan</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gan), treacherous Duke of Maganza.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ganelon of Mayence</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ganˈe-lon of Mayence), one of Charlemagne’s knights.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ganges</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ganˈges), river in India.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gano</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gaˈno), a peer of Charlemagne.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ganymede</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ganˈy-mede), the most beautiful of all mortals; carried off to Olympus that he might fill the cup of Zeus and live among the immortal gods.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gareth</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Garˈeth), Arthur’s knight.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gaudisso</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gau-disˈso), Sultan, ff.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gaul</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gaul), ancient France.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gautama</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gauˈta-ma), Prince, the Buddha (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gawain</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ga-wainˈ), Arthur’s knight.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gawl</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gawl), son of Clud, suitor for Rhiannon.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gemini See Castor</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gemˈi-ni (See Castor)), constellation created by Jupiter from the twin-brothers after death.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Genghis Khan</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Genˈghis Khan), Tartar conqueror.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Genius</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Geˈni-us), in Roman belief, the protective Spirit of each individual man. See Juno.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Geoffrey of Monmouth</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Geofˈfrey of Monˈmouth), translator into Latin of the Welsh History of the Kings of Britain (1150).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Geraint</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ge-raintˈ), a knight of King Arthur.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gerda</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gerˈda), wife of Frey.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Geri</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Geˈri), one of Odin’s two wolves.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Geryon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Geˈry-on), a three-bodied monster.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gesnes</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gesˈnes), navigator sent for Isoude the Fair.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Giallar Horn</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gi-alˈlar Horn), the trumpet that Heimdal will blow at the judgment day.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Giants</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Giˈants), beings of monstrous size and of fearful countenances; represented as in constant opposition to the gods; in Wagner’s Nibelungen Ring.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gibichung race</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Giˈbich-ung race), ancestors of Alberich.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gibraltar</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gi-bralˈtar), great rock and town at southwest corner of Spain (See Pillars of Hercules).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gildas</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gilˈdas), a scholar of Arthur’s court.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Girard</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gi-rardˈ), son of Duke Sevinus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Glastonbury</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Glasˈton-bur-y), where Arthur died.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Glaucus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Glau-cus), a fisherman, loving Scylla.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gleipnir</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gleipˈnir), magical chain on the wolf Fenris.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Glewlwyd</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Glewˈlw-yd), Arthur’s porter.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gods of the ancient myths</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gods of the ancient myths).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Golden Age</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Golden Age).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Golden Apples</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Golden Apples).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Golden Fleece</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Golden Fleece), of ram used for escape of children of Athamas, named Helle and Phryxus (which see); after sacrifice of ram to Jupiter, fleece was guarded by sleepless dragon and gained by Jason and Argonauts (which see; also Helle).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Goneril</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gonˈer-il), daughter of Leir.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gordian Knot</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gorˈdi-an Knot), tying up in temple the wagon of Gordius, he who could untie it being destined to be lord of Asia; it was cut by Alexander the Great.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gordius</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gorˈdi-us), a countryman who, arriving in Phrygia in a wagon, was made king by the people, thus interpreting an oracle.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gorgons</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gorˈgons), three monstrous females, with huge teeth, brazen claws and snakes for hair, sight of whom turned beholders to stone; Medusa, the most famous, slain by Perseus (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gorlois</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gorˈlois), Duke of Tintadel.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gouvernail</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gou-ver-nail), squire of Isabella, queen of Lionesse, protector of her son Tristram while young, and his squire in knighthood.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Graal</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Graal), the Holy, cup from which the Saviour drank at Last Supper, taken by Joseph of Arimathea to Europe, and lost, its recovery becoming a sacred quest for Arthur’s knights.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Graces</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Graces), three goddesses who enhanced the enjoyments of life by refinement and gentleness; they were Aglaia (brilliance), Euphrosyne (joy), and Thalia (bloom).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gradasso</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gra-dasˈso), king of Sericane.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Graeae</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Graeˈae), three gray-haired female watchers for the Gorgons, with one movable eye and one tooth between the three.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Grand Lama</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Grand Laˈma), Buddhist pontiff in Thibet.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Great Bear</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Great Bear), constellation.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Grendel</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Grenˈdel), monster slain by Beowulf.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Griefs</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Griefs).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gryphon griffin</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gryˈphon (griffin)), a fabulous animal, with the body of a lion and the head and wings of an eagle, dwelling in the Rhipaean mountains, between the Hyperboreans and the one-eyed Arimaspians, and guarding the gold of the North.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Guebers</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gueˈbers), Persian fire-worshippers.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Guendolen</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Guenˈdo-len), wife of Locrine.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Guenevere</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Guenˈe-vere), wife of King Arthur, beloved by Launcelot.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Guerin</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Guerˈin), lord of Vienne, father of Oliver.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Guiderius</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gui-deˈri-us), son of Cymbeline.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Guillamurius</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Guil-la-muˈri-us), king in Ireland.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Guimier</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gui-mierˈ), betrothed of Caradoc.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gullinbursti</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gul-lin-bursˈti), the boar drawing Frey’s car.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gulltopp</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gullˈtopp), Heimdell’s horse.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gunfasius</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gun-faˈsi-us), King of the Orkneys.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gnther</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Günˈther), Burgundian king, brother of Kriemhild.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gutrune</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Guˈtrune), half-sister to Hagen.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gwern</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gwern), son of Matholch and Branwen.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gwernach the Giant</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gwerˈnach the Giant), -.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gwiffert Petit</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gwiffˈert Peˈtit), ally of Geraint.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gwyddno</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gwyddˈno), Garanˈhir, King of Gwaelod.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gwyr</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gwyr), judge in the court of Arthur.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Gyoll</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Gyˈoll), river.</p>
					</dd>
				</dl>
			</section>
			<section id="glossary-h">
				<h3 epub:type="title">H</h3>
				<dl>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hades</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Haˈdes), originally the god of the nether world⁠—the name later used to designate the gloomy subterranean land of the dead.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Haemon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Haeˈmon), son of Creon of Thebes, and lover of Antigone.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Haemonian city</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hae-moˈni-an city).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Haemus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Haeˈmus), Mount, northern boundary of Thrace.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hagan</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Haˈgan), a principal character in the Nibelungen Lied, slayer of Siegfried.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Halcyone</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hal-cyˈo-ne), daughter of Aeneas, and the beloved wife of Ceyx, who, when he was drowned, flew to his floating body, and the pitying gods changed them both to birds (kingfishers), who nest at sea during a certain calm week in winter (“halcyon weather”).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hamadryads</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ham-a-dryˈads), tree- or wood-nymphs. See Nymphs.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Harmonia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Har-moˈni-a), daughter of Mars and Venus, wife of Cadmus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Haroun al Raschid</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ha-rounˈ al Raˈschid), Caliph of Arabia, contemporary of Charlemagne.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Harpies</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Harˈpies), monsters, with head and bust of woman, but wings, legs and tail of birds, seizing souls of the wicked, or punishing evildoers by greedily snatching or defiling their food.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Harpocrates</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Har-pocˈra-tes), Egyptian god, Horus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Heaven</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Heaven).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hebe</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Heˈbe), daughter of Juno, cupbearer to the gods.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hebrus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Heˈbrus), ancient name of river Maritzka.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hecate</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hecˈa-te), a mighty and formidable divinity, supposed to send at night all kinds of demons and terrible phantoms from the lower world.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hector</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hecˈtor), son of Priam and champion of Troy.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hector</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hecˈtor), one of Arthur’s knights.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hector de Marys</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hecˈtor de Ma-rysˈ), a knight.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hecuba</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hecˈu-ba), wife of Priam, king of Troy, to whom she bore Hector, Paris, and many other children.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hegira</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(He-giˈra), flight of Mahomet from Mecca to Medina (622 <abbr class="era">AD</abbr>), era from which Mahometans reckon time, as we do from the birth of Christ.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Heidrun</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Heidˈrun), she-goat, furnishing mead for slain heroes in Valhalla.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Heimdall</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Heimˈdall), watchman of the gods.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hel</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hel), the lower world of Scandinavia, to which were consigned those who had not died in battle.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hela Death</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Heˈla (Death)), the daughter of Loki and the mistress of the Scandinavian Hel.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Helen</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Helˈen), daughter of Jupiter and Leda; wife of Menelaus; carried off by Paris and cause of the Trojan War.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Helenus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Helˈe-nus), son of Priam and Hecuba, celebrated for his prophetic powers.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Heliades</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(He-liˈa-des), sisters of Phaëton.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Helicon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Helˈi-con), Mount, in Greece, residence of Apollo and the Muses, with fountains of poetic inspiration, Aganippe and Hippocrene.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Helioopolis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(He-lio-opˈo-lis), city of the Sun, in Egypt.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hellas</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Helˈlas), Greece.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Helle</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Helˈle), daughter of Thessalian King Athamas, who, escaping from cruel father with her brother Phryxus, on ram with golden fleece, fell into the sea-strait since named for her (See Golden Fleece).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hellespont</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Helˈles-pont), narrow strait between Europe and Asia Minor, named for Helle (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hengist</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Henˈgist), Saxon invader of Britain, 449 <abbr class="era">AD</abbr>.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hephaestos</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(He-phaesˈtos), See Vulcan.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hera</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Heˈra), called Juno by the Romans, a daughter of Cronos (Saturn) and Rhea, and sister and wife of Jupiter. See Juno.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hercules</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Herˈcu-les), athletic hero, son of Jupiter and Alcmena, achieved twelve vast labors and many famous deeds.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hercules</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Herˈcu-les), Pillars of (See Pillars of Hercules).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hercules</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Herˈcu-les), the twelve labors of.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hereward the Wake</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Herˈe-ward the Wake), hero of the Saxons.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hermes Mercury</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Herˈmes (Mercury)), messenger of the gods, deity of commerce, science, eloquence, trickery, theft, and skill generally.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hermione</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Her-miˈo-ne), daughter of Menelaus and Helen.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hermod</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Herˈmod), the nimble, son of Odin.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hero</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Heˈro), a priestess of Venus, beloved of Leander (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Herodotus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(He-rodˈo-tus), Greek historian.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hesiod</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Heˈsi-od), Greek poet.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hesperia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hes-peˈri-a), ancient name for Italy.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hesperides See Apples of the Hesperides</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hes-perˈi-des (See Apples of the Hesperides)).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hesperus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hesˈpe-rus), the evening star (also called Daystar, <abbr>p.</abbr> ).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hestia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hesˈti-a), called Vesta by the Romans, the goddess of the hearth.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hildebrand</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hilˈde-brand), German magician and champion.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hindu mythology</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hinˈdu mythology), -.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hindu triad</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hinˈdu triad), Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hippocrene See Helicon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hip-po-creˈne (See Helicon)).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hippodamia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hip-po-da-miˈa), wife of Pirithous, at whose wedding the Centaurs offered violence to the bride, causing a great battle.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hippogriff</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hipˈpo-griff), winged horse, with eagle’s head and claws.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hippolyta</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hip-polˈy-ta), Queen of the Amazons.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hippolytus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hip-polˈy-tus), son of Thesus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hippomenes</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hip-pomˈe-nes), who won Atalanta in foot-race, beguiling her with golden apples thrown for her to pick up.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Histion</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hisˈti-on), son of Japhet.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hodur</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hoˈdur), blind man, who, fooled by Loki, threw a mistletoe-twig at Baldur, killing him.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hoel</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hoˈel), king of Brittany.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Holy Wars of Charlemagne</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Holy Wars of Charlemagne).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Homer</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hoˈmer), the blind poet of Greece, about 850 <abbr class="era">BC</abbr>.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hope See Pandora</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hope (See Pandora)).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Horae</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hoˈrae), See Hours.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Horsa</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Horˈsa), with Hengist, invader of Britain.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Horus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hoˈrus), Egyptian god of the sun.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Houdain</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hou-dainˈ), Tristram’s dog.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hringham</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hringˈham), Baldur’s ship.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hrothgar</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hrothˈgar), king of Denmark.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hugi</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Huˈgi), who beat Thialfi in footraces.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hugin</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Huˈgin), one of Odin’s two ravens.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hunger</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hunˈger).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hunding</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hunˈding), husband of Sieglinda.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Huon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Huˈon), son of Duke Sevinus, ff.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hyacinthus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hy-a-cinˈthus), a youth beloved by Apollo, and accidentally killed by him, changed in death to the flower, hyacinth.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hyades</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hyˈa-des), Nysaean nymphs, nurses of infant Bacchus, rewarded by being placed as cluster of stars in the heavens.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hyale</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hyˈa-le), a nymph of Diana.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hydra</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hyˈdra), nine-headed monster slain by Hercules.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hygeia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hy-geˈi-a), goddess of health, daughter of Aesculapius.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hylas</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hyˈlas), a youth detained by nymphs of spring where he sought water.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hymen</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hyˈmen), the god of marriage, imagined as a handsome youth and invoked in bridal songs.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hymettus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hy-metˈtus), mountain in Attica, near Athens, celebrated for its marble and its honey.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hyperboreans</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hy-per-boˈre-ans), people of the far North.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hyperion</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hy-peˈri-on), a Titan, son of Uranus and Ge, and father of Helios, Selene, and Eos.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hyrcania</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hyr-caˈnia), Prince of, betrothed to Clarimunda.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Hyrieus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Hy-ri-eˈus), king in Greece.</p>
					</dd>
				</dl>
			</section>
			<section id="glossary-i">
				<h3 epub:type="title">I</h3>
				<dl>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Iapetus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(I-apˈe-tus), a Titan, son of Uranus and Ge, and father of Atlas, Prometheus, Epimetheus, and Menoetius.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Iasius</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(I-aˈsi-us), father of Atalanta.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ibycus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ibˈy-cus), a poet, story of, and the cranes.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Icaria</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(I-caˈri-a), island of the Aegean Sea, one of the Sporades.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Icarius</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(I-caˈri-us), Spartan prince, father of Penelope.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Icarus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Icˈa-rus), son of Daedalus, he flew too near the sun with artificial wings, and, the wax melting, he fell into the sea.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Iceland</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Iceˈland).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Icelos</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ice-los), attendant of Morpheus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Icolumkill</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(I-colˈum-kill), See Iona.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ida</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Iˈda), Mount, a Trojan hill.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Idaeus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(I-daeˈus), a Trojan herald.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Idas</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Iˈdas), son of Aphareus and Arene, and brother of Lynceus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Iduna</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(I-duˈna), wife of Bragi.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Igerne</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(I-gerneˈ), wife of Gorlois, and mother, by Uther, of Arthur.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Iliad</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ilˈi-ad), epic poem of the Trojan War, by Homer.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ilioheus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ilˈi-oˈheus), a son of Niobe (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ilium</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ilˈi-um), See Troy.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Illyria</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Il-lyrˈi-a), Adriatic countries north of Greece.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Imogen</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Imˈo-gen), daughter of Pandrasus, wife of Trojan Brutus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Inachus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Inˈa-chus), son of Oceanus and Tethys, and father of Phoroneus and Io; also first king of Argos, and said to have given his name to the river Inachus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Incubus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Inˈcu-bus), an evil spirit, supposed to lie upon persons in their sleep.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>India</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Inˈdia).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Indra</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Inˈdra), Hindu god of heaven, thunder, lightning, storm and rain.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Infernal regions</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Infernal regions), -.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ino</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Iˈno), wife of Athamas, fleeing from whom with infant son she sprang into the sea and was changed to Leucothea (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Io</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Iˈo), changed to a heifer by Jupiter.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Iobates</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(I-obˈa-tes), King of Lycia.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Iolaus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(I-o-laˈus), servant of Hercules.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Iolcos</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(I-olˈcos).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Iole</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Iˈo-le), sister of Dryope.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Iona</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(I-oˈna), or Icolmkill, a small northern island near Scotland, where <abbr>St.</abbr> Columba founded a missionary monastery (563 <abbr class="era">AD</abbr>).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ionia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(I-oˈni-a), coast of Asia Minor.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ionian Sea</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(I-oˈni-an Sea).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Iphigenia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Iph-i-ge-niˈa), daughter of Agamemnon, offered as a sacrifice but carried away by Diana.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Iphis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Iˈphis), died for love of Anaxarete.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Iphitus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Iphˈi-tus), friend of Hercules, killed by him.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ireland</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ireˈland), ff.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Iris</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Iˈris), goddess of the rainbow, messenger of Juno and Zeus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Iron Age</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Iron Age).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ironside</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Iˈron-side), Arthur’s knight.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Isabella</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Is-a-belˈla), daughter of king of Galicia.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Isis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Iˈsis), wife of Osiris; described as the giver of death.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Isles of the Blessed</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Isles of the Blessed).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ismarus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Isˈma-rus), first stop of Ulysses, returning from Trojan War.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ismenos</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ismeˈnos), a son of Niobe, slain by Apollo.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Isolier</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(I-soˈlier), friend of Rinaldo.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Isoude the Fair</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(I-soudeˈ the Fair), beloved of Tristram.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Isoude of the White Hands</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(I-soudeˈ of the White Hands), married to Tristram.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Isthmian Games</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Isthˈmi-an Games), See Games.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Italy</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Itˈa-ly).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ithaca</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ithˈa-ca), home of Ulysses and Penelope.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Iulus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(I-uˈlus), son of Aeneas.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ivo</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Iˈvo), Saracen king, befriending Rinaldo.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ixion</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ix-iˈon), once a sovereign of Thessaly, sentenced in Tartarus to be lashed with serpents to a wheel which a strong wind drove continually around.</p>
					</dd>
				</dl>
			</section>
			<section id="glossary-j">
				<h3 epub:type="title">J</h3>
				<dl>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Janiculum</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ja-nicˈu-lum), Roman fortress on the Janiculus, a hill on the other side of the Tiber.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Janus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Jaˈnus), a deity from the earliest times held in high estimation by the Romans.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Japan</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ja-panˈ).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Japhet Iapetus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Jaˈphet (Iapetus)).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Jason</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Jaˈson), leader of the Argonauts, seeking the Golden Fleece.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Java</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Jaˈva).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Jocasta</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Jo-casˈta).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Joseph of Arimathea</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Joˈseph of Arimathea), who bore the Holy Graal to Europe.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Jotunheim</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Joˈtun-heim), home of the giants in Northern mythology.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Jove Zeus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Jove (Zeus)), chief god of Roman and Grecian mythology. See Jupiter.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Joyous Garde</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Joyˈous Garde), residence of Sir Launcelot of the Lake.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Juggernaut</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Jugˈger-naut), Hindu deity.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Juno</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Juˈno), the particular guardian spirit of each woman (See Genius).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Juno</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Juˈno), wife of Jupiter, queen of the gods.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Jupiter</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Juˈpi-ter), Jovis-pater, Father Jove; Jupiter and Jove used interchangeably.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Jupiter Ammon See Ammon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Juˈpi-ter Amˈmon (See Ammon)).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Jupiter Capitolinus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Juˈpi-ter Capˈi-to-liˈnus), temple of, preserving the Sibylline books.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Justice</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Jusˈtice), See Themis.</p>
					</dd>
				</dl>
			</section>
			<section id="glossary-k">
				<h3 epub:type="title">K</h3>
				<dl>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Kadyriath</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ka-dy-riˈath), advises King Arthur.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Kai</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Kai), son of Kyner.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Kalki</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Kalˈki), tenth avatar (which see) of Vishnu.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Kay</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Kay), Arthur’s steward and a knight.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Kedalion</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ke-daˈli-on), guide of Orion.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Kerman</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Kerˈman), desert of.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Kicva</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Kicˈva), daughter of Gwynn Gloy.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Kilwich</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Kilˈwich), son of Kilydd.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Kilydd</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ki-lyddˈ), son of Prince Kelyddon, of Wales.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Kneph</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Kneph), spirit or breath.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Knights</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Knights), training and life of.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Kriemhild</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Kriemˈhild), wife of Siegfried.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Krishna</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Krishˈna), eighth avatar (which see) of Vishnu, Hindu deity of fertility in nature and mankind.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Kyner</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Kyˈner), father of Kay.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Kynon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Kyˈnon), son of Clydno.</p>
					</dd>
				</dl>
			</section>
			<section id="glossary-l">
				<h3 epub:type="title">L</h3>
				<dl>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Labyrinth</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Labˈy-rinth), the enclosed maze of passageways where roamed the Minotaur of Crete, killed by Theseus with aid of Ariadne.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Lachesis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Lachˈe-sis), one of the Fates (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Lady of the Fountain</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Lady of the Fountain), tale told by Kynon.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Laertes</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(La-erˈtes), father of Ulysses.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Laestrygonians</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Laes-try-goˈni-ans), savages attacking Ulysses.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Laius</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Laˈius), King of Thebes.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Lama</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Laˈma), holy man of Thibet.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Lampetia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Lam-peˈtia), daughter of Hyperion.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Laocoon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(La-ocˈo-on), a priest of Neptune, in Troy, who warned the Trojans against the Wooden Horse (which see), but when two serpents came out of the sea and strangled him and his two sons, the people listened to the Greek spy Sinon (which see), and brought the fatal Horse into the town.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Laodamia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(La-o-da-miˈa), daughter of Acastus and wife of Protesilaus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Laodegan</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(La-odˈe-gan), King of Carmalide, helped by Arthur and Merlin.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Laomedon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(La-omˈe-don), King of Troy.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Lapithae</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Lapˈi-thae), Thessalonians, whose king had invited the Centaurs to his daughter’s wedding but who attacked them for offering violence to the bride.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Lares</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Laˈres), household deities.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Larkspur</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Larkˈspur), flower from the blood of Ajax.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Latinus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(La-tiˈnus), ruler of Latium, where Aeneas landed in Italy.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Latmos</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Latˈmos), Mount, where Diana fell in love with Endymion.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Latona</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(La-toˈna), mother of Apollo.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Launcelot</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Launceˈlot), the most famous knight of the Round Table.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Lausus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Lauˈsus), son of Mezentius, killed by Aeneas.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Lavinia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(La-vinˈi-a), daughter of Latinus and wife of Aeneas.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Lavinium</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(La-vinˈi-um), Italian city named for Lavinia.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Law</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Law), See Themis.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Leander</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Le-anˈder), a youth of Abydos, who, swimming the Hellespont to see Hero, his love, was drowned.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Lebadea</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Le-ba-deˈa), site of the oracle of Trophonius.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Lebynthos</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Le-bynˈthos), Aegean island.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Leda</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Leˈda), Queen of Sparta, wooed by Jupiter in the form of a swan.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Leir</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Leir), mythical King of Britain, original of Shakespeare’s Lear.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Lelaps</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Leˈlaps), dog of Cephalus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Lemnos</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Lemˈnos), large island in the Aegean Sea, sacred to Vulcan.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Lemures</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Lemˈu-res), the spectres or spirits of the dead.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Leo</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Leˈo), Roman emperor. Or, Greek prince.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Lethe</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Leˈthe), river of Hades, drinking whose water caused forgetfulness.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Leucadia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Leu-caˈdia), a promontory, whence Sappho, disappointed in love, was said to have thrown herself into the sea.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Leucothea</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Leu-coˈthe-a), a sea-goddess, invoked by sailors for protection (See Ino).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Lewis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Lewˈis), son of Charlemagne.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Liber</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Liˈber), ancient god of fruitfulness.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Libethra</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Li-beˈthra), burial-place of Orpheus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Libya</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Libˈy-a), Greek name for continent of Africa in general.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Libyan Desert</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Libˈy-an Desert), in Africa.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Libyan Oasis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Libˈy-an Oasis).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Lichas</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Liˈchas), who brought the shirt of Nessus to Hercules.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Limours</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Li-moursˈ), Earl of.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Linus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Liˈnus), musical instructor of Hercules.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Lion</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Lion), constellation.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Lionel</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Liˈo-nel), knight of the Round Table.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Little Bear</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Little Bear), constellation.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Llyr</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Llyr), King of Britain.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Locrine</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Lo-crineˈ), son of Brutus in Albion, king of Central England.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Loegria</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Lo-eˈgri-a), kingdom of (England).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Logestilla</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Lo-ge-stilˈla), a wise lady, who entertained Rogero and his friends.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Logi</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Loˈgi), who vanquished Loki in an eating-contest.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Loki</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Loˈki), the Satan of Norse mythology, son of the giant Farbanti.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Lomond</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Loˈmond), Lake.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>London</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Lonˈdon).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Lot</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Lot), King, a rebel chief, subdued by King Arthur, then a loyal knight.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Lotis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Loˈtis), a nymph, changed to a lotus plant and in that form plucked by Dryope (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>LotusEaters</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Loˈtus-Eaters), soothed to indolence; companions of Ulysses landing among them lost all memory of home and had to be dragged away before they would continue their voyage.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Love Eros issued from egg of Night</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Love (Eros) issued from egg of Night), and with arrows and torch produced life and joy.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Lucan</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Luˈcan), one of Arthur’s knights.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Lucius Tiberius</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Luˈcius Ti-beˈri-us), Roman procurator in Britain demanding tribute from Arthur.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Lud</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Lud), British king, whose capital was called Lud’s Town (London).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ludgate</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ludˈgate), city gate where Lud was buried.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Luned</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Luˈned), maiden who guided Owain to the Lady of the Fountain.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Lycahas</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Lycˈa-has), a turbulent sailor.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Lycaon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ly-caˈon), son of Priam.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Lycia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Lycˈi-a), a district in Southern Asia Minor.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Lycomedes</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Lyc-o-meˈdes), king of the Dolopians, who treacherously slew Theseus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Lycus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Lyˈcus), usurping King of Thebes.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Lynceus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Lynˈceus), one of the sons of Aegyptus.</p>
					</dd>
				</dl>
			</section>
			<section id="glossary-m">
				<h3 epub:type="title">M</h3>
				<dl>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Mabinogeon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Mab-i-noˈge-on), plural of Mabinogi; fairy tales and romances of the Welsh.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Mabon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Maˈbon), son of Modron.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Machaon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ma-chaˈon), son of Aesculapius.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Madan</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Maˈdan), son of Guendolen.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Madoc</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Maˈdoc), a forester of King Arthur.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Mador</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Maˈdor), Scottish knight.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Maelgan</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Maelˈgan), king who imprisoned Elphin.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Maeonia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Mae-oˈni-a), ancient Lydia.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Magi</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Maˈgi), Persian priests.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Mahadeva</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ma-ha-deˈva), same as Siva (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Mahomet</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ma-homˈet), great prophet of Arabia, born in Mecca, 571 <abbr class="era">AD</abbr>, proclaimed worship of God instead of idols, spread his religion through disciples and then by force till it prevailed, with Arabian dominion, over vast regions in Asia, Africa, and Spain in Europe.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Maia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Maˈia), daughter of Atlas and Pleione, eldest and most beautiful of the Pleiades.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Mail armour</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Mail armour).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Malagigi the Enchanter</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Mal-a-giˈgi the Enchanter), one of Charlemagne’s knights.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Maleagans</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ma-leˈa-gans), false knight.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Malvasius</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Mal-vaˈsi-us), King of Iceland.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Mambrino</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Mam-briˈno), with invisible helmet.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Man</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Man), creation of.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Manawyddan</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Man-a-wydˈdan), brother of King Vran, of London.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Mandricardo</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Man-dri-carˈdo), son of Agrican.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Mantua</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Manˈtu-a), in Italy, birthplace of Virgil.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Manu</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Maˈnu), ancestor of mankind.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Marathon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Marˈa-thon), where Theseus and Pirithous met.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Mark</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Mark), King of Cornwall, husband of Isoude the Fair.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Marmora</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Marˈmo-ra), Sea of.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Maro</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Maˈro), See Virgil.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Marphisa</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Mar-phiˈsa), sister of Rogero.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Mars</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Mars).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Marsilius</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Mar-silˈi-us), Spanish king, treacherous foe of Charlemagne.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Marsyas</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Marˈsy-as), inventor of the flute, who challenged Apollo to musical competition, and, defeated, was flayed alive.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Matsya</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Matsˈya), the Fish, first avatar (which see) of Vishnu.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Meander</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Me-anˈder), Grecian river.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Medea</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Me-deˈa), princess and sorceress who aided Jason.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Mediterranean Sea</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Med-i-ter-raˈne-an Sea).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Medoro</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Me-doˈro), a young Moor, who wins Angelica.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Medusa</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Me-duˈsa), one of the Gorgons (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Megaera</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Me-gaeˈra), one of the Furies (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Megara</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Megˈa-ra).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Melampus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Me-lamˈpus), a Spartan dog. Or, the first mortal endowed with prophetic powers.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Melanthus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Me-lanˈthus), steersman for Bacchus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Meleager</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Me-le-aˈger), one of the Argonauts (See Althaea).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Meliadus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Mel-i-aˈdus), King of Lionesse, near Cornwall.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Melicertes</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Melˈi-cerˈtes), infant son of Ino, changed to Palaemon (See Ino, Leucothea, and Palaemon).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Melissa</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Me-lisˈsa), priestess at Merlin’s tomb.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Melisseus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Me-lisˈse-us), a Cretan king.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Melpomene</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Mel-pomˈe-ne), one of the Muses (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Memnon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Memˈnon), the beautiful son of Tithonus and Eos (Aurora), and king of the Ethiopians, slain in Trojan War.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Memphis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Memˈphis), Egyptian city.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Menelaus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Men-e-laˈus), son of King of Sparta, husband of Helen.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Menoeceus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Men-oeˈceus), son of Creon, voluntary victim in war to gain success for his father.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Mentor</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Menˈtor), son of Alcimus and a faithful friend of Ulysses.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Mercury See Hermes</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Merˈcu-ry (See Hermes)).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Merlin</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Merˈlin), enchanter.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Merope</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Merˈo-pe), daughter of King of Chios, beloved by Orion.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Mesmerism</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Mesˈmer-ism), likened to curative oracle of Aesculapius at Epidaurus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Metabus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Metˈa-bus), father of Camilla.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Metamorphoses</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Metˈa-morˈpho-ses), Ovid’s poetical legends of mythical transformations, a large source of our knowledge of classic mythology.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Metanira</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Met-a-niˈra), a mother, kind to Ceres seeking Proserpine.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Metempsychosis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Me-tempˈsy-choˈsis), transmigration of souls⁠—rebirth of dying men and women in forms of animals or human beings.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Metis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Meˈtis), Prudence, a spouse of Jupiter.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Mezentius</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Me-zenˈti-us), a brave but cruel soldier, opposing Aeneas in Italy.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Midas</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Miˈdas), -.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Midgard</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Midˈgard), the middle world of the Norsemen.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Midgard serpent</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Midˈgard serpent), a seamonster, child of Loki.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Milky Way</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Milky Way), starred path across the sky, believed to be road to palace of the gods.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Milo</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Miˈlo), a great athlete.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Milon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Miˈlon), father of Orlando.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Milton</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Milˈton), John, great English poet, whose History of England is here largely used.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Mime</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Miˈme), one of the chief dwarfs of ancient German mythology.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Minerva Athene</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Mi-nerˈva (Athene)), daughter of Jupiter, patroness of health, learning, and wisdom.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Minos</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Miˈnos), King of Crete.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Minotaur</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Minˈo-taur), monster killed by Theseus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Mistletoe</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Misˈtle-toe), fatal to Baldur.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Mnemosyne</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Mne-mosˈy-ne), one of the Muses (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Modesty</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Modesty), statue to.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Modred</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Moˈdred), nephew of King Arthur.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Moly</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Moˈly), plant, powerful against sorcery.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Momus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Moˈmus), a deity whose delight was to jeer bitterly at gods and men.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Monad</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Monˈad), the “unit” of Pythagoras.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Monsters</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Monsters), unnatural beings, evilly disposed to men.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Montalban</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Mont-alˈban), Rinaldo’s castle.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Month</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Month), the, attendant upon the Sun.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Moon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Moon), goddess of, see Diana.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Moraunt</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Mo-rauntˈ), knight, an Irish champion.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Morgana</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Mor-gaˈna), enchantress, the Lady of the Lake in “Orlando Furioso,” same as Morgane Le Fay in tales of Arthur.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Morgane le Fay</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Mor-ganeˈ le Fay), Queen of Norway, King Arthur’s sister, an enchantress.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Morgan Tud</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Morˈgan Tud), Arthur’s chief physician.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Morpheus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Morˈpheus), son of Sleep and god of dreams.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Morte dArthur</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Morte d’Arthur), romance, by Sir Thomas Mallory.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Mulciber</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Mulˈci-ber), Latin name of Vulcan.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Mull</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Mull), Island of.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Munin</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Muˈnin), one of Odin’s two ravens.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Musaeus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Mu-saeˈus), sacred poet, son of Orpheus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Muses</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Muˈses), The, nine goddesses presiding over poetry, <abbr>etc.</abbr>⁠—Calliope, epic poetry; Clio, history; Erato, love poetry; Euterpe, lyric poetry; Melpomene, tragedy; Polyhymnia, oratory and sacred song; Terpsichore, choral song and dance; Thalia, comedy and idyls; Urania, astronomy.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Muspelheim</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Musˈpel-heim), the fire-world of the Norsemen.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Mycenae</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(My-ceˈnae), ancient Grecian city, of which Agamemnon was king.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Myrddin Merlin</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Myrdˈdin (Merlin)).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Myrmidons</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Myrˈmi-dons), bold soldiers of Achilles.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Mysia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Mysˈi-a), Greek district on northwest coast of Asia Minor.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Mythology</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Mythology), origin of, collected myths, describing gods of early peoples.</p>
					</dd>
				</dl>
			</section>
			<section id="glossary-n">
				<h3 epub:type="title">N</h3>
				<dl>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Naiads</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Naˈiads), water-nymphs.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Namo</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Naˈmo), Duke of Bavaria, one of Charlemagne’s knights, ff.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Nanna</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Nanˈna), wife of Baldur.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Nanters</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Nanˈters), British king.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Nantes</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Nantes), site of Caradoc’s castle.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Nape</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Naˈpe), a dog of Diana.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Narcissus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Nar-cisˈsus), who died of unsatisfied love for his own image in the water.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Nausicaa</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Nau-sicˈa-a), daughter of King Alcinoüs, who befriended Ulysses.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Nausithous</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Nau-sithˈo-us), king of Phaeacians.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Naxos</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Naxˈos), Island of.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Negus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Neˈgus), King of Abyssinia.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Nemea</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ne-meˈa), forest devastated by a lion killed by Hercules.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Nemean Games</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ne-meˈan Games), held in honor of Jupiter and Hercules.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Nemean Lion</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ne-meˈan Lion), killed by Hercules.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Nemesis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Nemˈe-sis), goddess of vengeance.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Nennius</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Nenˈni-us), British combatant of Caesar.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Neoptolemus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ne-op-tolˈe-mus), son of Achilles.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Nepenthe</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ne-penˈthe), ancient drug to cause forgetfulness of pain or distress.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Nephele</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Nephˈe-le), mother of Phryxus and Helle.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Nephthys</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Nephˈthys), Egyptian goddess.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Neptune</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Nepˈtune), identical with Poseidon, god of the sea.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Nereids</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Neˈre-ids), sea-nymphs, daughters of Nereus and Doris.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Nereus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Neˈre-us), a sea-god.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Nessus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Nesˈsus), a centaur killed by Hercules, whose jealous wife sent him a robe or shirt steeped in the blood of Nessus, which poisoned him.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Nestor</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Nesˈtor), king of Pylos, renowned for his wisdom, justice, and knowledge of war.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Nibelungen Hoard</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Niˈbe-lunˈgen Hoard), treasure seized by Siegfried from the Nibelungs, buried in the Rhine by Hagan after killing Siegfried, and lost when Hagan was killed by Kriemhild; theme of Wagner’s four music-dramas, <i epub:type="se:name.music.opera">The Ring of the Nibelungen</i>.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Nibelungen Lied</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Niˈbe-lunˈgen Lied), German epic, giving the same nature-myth as the Norse Volsunga Saga, concerning the Hoard.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Nibelungen Ring</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Niˈbe-lunˈgen Ring), Wagner’s music-dramas.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Nibelungs</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Niˈbe-lungs), the, a race of Northern dwarfs.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Nidhogge</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Nidˈhogge), a serpent in the lower world that lives on the dead.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Niffleheim</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Niffleˈheim), mist world of the Norsemen; the Hades of absent spirits.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Night</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Night).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Nile</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Nile), Egyptian river.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Nimrod</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Nimˈrod), tower of.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ninus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Niˈnus), Tomb of.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Niobe</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Niˈo-be), daughter of Tantalus, proud Queen of Thebes, whose seven sons and seven daughters were killed by Apollo and Diana, at which Amphion, her husband, killed himself, and Niobe wept until she was turned to stone.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Nisus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Niˈsus), King of Megara.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Noah</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Noˈah), as legendary ancestor of French, Roman, German, and British peoples.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Noman</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Noˈman), name assumed by Ulysses.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Norns</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Norns), the three Scandinavian Fates, Urdur (the past), Verdandi (the present), and Skuld (the future).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Northern Mythology</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Northern Mythology), -.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Nothung</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Noˈthung), magic sword.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Notus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Noˈtus), southwest wind.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Nox</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Nox), daughter of Chaos and sister of Erebus; personification of night.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Numa</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Nuˈma), second king of Rome.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Nymphs</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Nymphs), beautiful maidens, lesser divinities of nature: Dryads and Hamadryads, tree-nymphs; Naiads, spring-, brook-, and river-nymphs; Nereids, sea-nymphs; Oreads, mountain- or hill-nymphs.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Nysaean nymphs</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ny-saeˈan nymphs).</p>
					</dd>
				</dl>
			</section>
			<section id="glossary-o">
				<h3 epub:type="title">O</h3>
				<dl>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ocean</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ocean).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Oceanus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(O-ceˈa-nus), a Titan, ruling watery elements.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ocyroe</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(O-cyrˈo-e), a prophetess, daughter of Chiron.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Oderic</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Odˈe-ric).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Odin</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Oˈdin), chief of the Norse gods.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Odyar</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Odˈyar), famous Biscayan hero.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Odysseus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(O-dysˈseus), See Ulysses.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Odyssey</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Odˈys-sey), Homer’s poem, relating the wanderings of Odysseus (Ulysses) on returning from Trojan War.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Oedipus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Oedˈi-pus), Theban hero, who guessed the riddle of the Sphinx (which see), becoming King of Thebes.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Oeneus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Oeˈneus), King of Calydon.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Oenone</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Oe-noˈne), nymph, married by Paris in his youth, and abandoned for Helen.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Oenopion</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Oe-noˈpi-on), King of Chios.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Oeta</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Oeˈta), Mount, scene of Hercules’ death.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ogier</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(O-gierˈ), the Dane, one of the paladins of Charlemagne.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Oliver</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Olˈi-ver), companion of Orlando.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Olwen</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Olˈwen), wife of Kilwich.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Olympia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(O-lymˈpia), a small plain in Elis, where the Olympic games were celebrated.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Olympiads</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(O-lymˈpi-ads), periods between Olympic games (four years).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Olympian games</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(O-lymˈpi-an games).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Olympus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(O-lymˈpus), dwelling-place of the dynasty of gods of which Zeus was the head.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Omphale</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Omˈpha-le), queen of Lydia, daughter of Iardanus and wife of Tmolus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ophion</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(O-phiˈon), king of the Titans, who ruled Olympus till dethroned by the gods Saturn and Rhea.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ops</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ops), See Rhea.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Oracles</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Orˈa-cles), answers from the gods to questions from seekers for knowledge or advice for the future, usually in equivocal form, so as to fit any event; also places where such answers were given forth, usually by a priest or priestess.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Orc</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Orc), a seamonster, foiled by Rogero when about to devour Angelica.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Oreads</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Oˈre-ads), nymphs of mountains and hills.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Orestes</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(O-resˈtes), son of Agamemnon and Clytemnestra; because of his crime in killing his mother, he was pursued by the Furies until purified by Minerva.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Orion</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(O-riˈon), youthful giant, loved by Diana; Constellation.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Orithyia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Or-i-thyˈi-a), a nymph, seized by Boreas.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Orlando</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Or-lanˈdo), a famous knight and nephew of Charlemagne.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ormuzd Greek</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Orˈmuzd (Greek), Oromasdes), son of Supreme Being, source of good as his brother Ahriman (Arimanes) was of evil, in Persian or Zoroastrian religion.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Orpheus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Orˈpheus), musician, son of Apollo and Calliope. See Eurydice.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Osiris</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(O-siˈris), the most beneficent of the Egyptian gods.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ossa</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Osˈsa), mountain of Thessaly.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ossian</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Osˈsian), Celtic poet of the second or third century.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ovid</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ovˈid), Latin poet (See Metamorphoses).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Owain</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(O-wainˈ), knight at King Arthur’s court.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ozanna</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(O-zanˈna), a knight of Arthur.</p>
					</dd>
				</dl>
			</section>
			<section id="glossary-p">
				<h3 epub:type="title">P</h3>
				<dl>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pactolus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pac-toˈlus), river whose sands were changed to gold by Midas (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Paeon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Paeˈon), a name for both Apollo and Aesculapius, gods of medicine.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pagans</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Paˈgans), heathen.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Paladins or peers</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Palˈa-dins or peers), knights errant.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Palaemon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pa-laeˈmon), son of Athamas and Ino (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Palamedes</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pal-a-meˈdes), messenger sent to call Ulysses to the Trojan War.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Palamedes</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pal-a-meˈdes), Saracen prince at Arthur’s court.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Palatine</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Palˈa-tine), one of Rome’s Seven Hills.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pales</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Paˈles), goddess presiding over cattle and pastures.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Palinurus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pal-i-nuˈrus), faithful steersman of Aeneas.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Palladium</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pal-laˈdi-um), properly any image of Pallas Athene, but specially applied to an image at Troy, which was stolen by Ulysses and Diomedes.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pallas</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Palˈlas), son of Evander.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pallas Athene Minerva</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Palˈlas A-theˈne (Minerva)).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pamphagus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pamˈpha-gus), a dog of Diana.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pan</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pan), god of nature and the universe.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Panathenaea</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pan-ath-e-naeˈa), festival in honor of Pallas Athene (Minerva).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pandean Pipes</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pan-deˈan Pipes), musical instrument of reeds, made by Pan in memory of Syrinx (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pandora allgifted</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pan-doˈra (all-gifted)), first woman, dowered with gifts by every god, yet entrusted with a box she was cautioned not to open; but, curious, she opened it, and out flew all the ills of humanity, leaving behind only Hope, which remained.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pandrasus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pan-draˈsus), a king in Greece, who persecuted Trojan exiles under Brutus, great-grandson of Aeneas, until they fought, captured him, and, with his daughter Imogen as Brutus’ wife, emigrated to Albion (later called Britain).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Panope</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Panˈo-pe), plain of.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Panthus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Panˈthus), alleged earlier incarnation of Pythagoras.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Paphlagonia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Paphˈla-goˈni-a), ancient country in Asia Minor, south of Black Sea.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Paphos</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Paˈphos), daughter of Pygmalion and Galatea (both of which, See).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Parcae</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Parˈcae), See Fates.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pariahs</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pa-riˈahs), lowest caste of Hindus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Paris</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Parˈis), son of Priam and Hecuba, who eloped with Helen (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Parnassian laurel</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Par-nas-sian laurel), wreath from Parnassus, crown awarded to successful poets.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Parnassus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Par-nasˈsus), mountain near Delphi, sacred to Apollo and the Muses.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Parsees</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Parˈsees), Persian fire-worshippers (Zoroastrians), of whom there are still thousands in Persia and India.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Parthenon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Parˈthe-non), the temple of Athene Parthenos (“the Virgin”) on the Acropolis of Athens.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Passebreul</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Passe-breulˈ), Tristram’s horse.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Patroclus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pa-troˈclus), friend of Achilles, killed by Hector.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pecheur</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Peˈcheur), King, uncle of Perceval.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Peers</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Peers), the.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pegasus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pegˈa-sus), winged horse, born from the sea-foam and the blood of Medusa.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Peleus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Peˈleus), king of the Myrmidons, father of Achilles by Thetis.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pelias</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Peˈli-as), usurping uncle of Jason.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pelion</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Peˈli-on), mountain.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pelleas</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pelˈle-as), knight of Arthur.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Penates</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pe-naˈtes), protective household deities of the Romans.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pendragon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Penˈdrag-on), King of Britain, elder brother of Uther-Pendragon (which see), who succeeded him.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Penelope</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pe-nelˈo-pe), wife of Ulysses, who, waiting twenty years for his return from the Trojan War, put off the suitors for her hand by promising to choose one when her weaving was done, but unravelled at night what she had woven by day.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Peneus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pe-neˈus), river god. Or, river.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Penthesilea</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pen-the-si-leˈa), queen of Amazons.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pentheus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Penˈthe-us), king of Thebes; having resisted the introduction of the worship of Bacchus into his kingdom, was driven mad by the god.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Penus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Peˈnus), Roman house pantry, giving name to the Penates.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pepin</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pepˈin), father of Charlemagne.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Peplus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pepˈlus), sacred robe of Minerva.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Perceval</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Perˈce-val), a great knight of Arthur.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Perdix</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Perˈdix), inventor of saw and compasses.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Periander</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Perˈi-anˈder), King of Corinth, friend of Arion.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Periphetes</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Per-i-pheˈtes), son of Vulcan, killed by Theseus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Persephone</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Per-sephˈo-ne), goddess of vegetation. See Proserpine.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Perseus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Perˈseus), son of Jupiter and Danaë, slayer of the Gorgon Medusa, deliverer of Andromeda from a seamonster.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Phaeacians</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Phae-aˈci-ans), people who entertained Ulysses.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Phaedra</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Phaeˈdra), faithless and cruel wife of Theseus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Phathusa</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pha-ë-thuˈsa), sister of Phaëton.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Phaton</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pha-ë-ton), son of Phoebus, who dared attempt to drive his father’s sun-chariot.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Phantasos</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Phanˈta-sos), a son of Somnus, bringing strange images to sleeping men.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Phaon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Phaˈon), beloved by Sappho.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Phelot</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pheˈlot), knight of Wales.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pheredin</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pherˈe-din), friend of Tristram, unhappy lover of Isoude.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Phidias</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Phidˈi-as), famous Greek sculptor.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Philemon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Phi-leˈmon), husband of Baucis (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Philoctetes</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Phil-oc-teˈtes), warrior who lighted the fatal pyre of Hercules.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Philoe</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Philˈo-e), burial-place of Osiris.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Phineus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Phinˈe-us), betrothed to Andromeda.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Phlegethon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Phlegˈe-thon), fiery river of Hades.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Phocis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Phoˈcis).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Phoebe</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Phoeˈbe), one of the sisters of Phaëton.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Phoebus Apollo</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Phoeˈbus (Apollo)), god of music, prophecy, and archery, the sun-god.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Phoenicia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Phoe-niˈcia).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Phoenicians</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Phoe-niˈci-ans).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Phoenix</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Phoeˈnix), a messenger to Achilles. Also a miraculous bird, dying in fire by its own act and springing up alive from its own ashes.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Phorbas</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Phorˈbas), a companion of Aeneas, whose form was assumed by Neptune in luring Palinuras the helmsman from his post.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Phrygia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Phrygˈi-a).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Phryxus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Phryxˈus), brother of Helle (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pinabel</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pinˈa-bel), knight.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pillars of Hercules</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pillars of Hercules), two mountains⁠—Calˈpè, now the Rock of Gibraltar, southwest corner of Spain in Europe, and Abˈy-la, facing it in Africa across the strait.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pindar</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pinˈdar), famous Greek poet.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pindus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pinˈdus), Grecian mountain.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pirene</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pi-reˈne), celebrated fountain at Corinth.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pirithous</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pi-rithˈo-us), king of the Lapithae in Thessaly, and friend of Theseus, husband of Hippodamia (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pleasure</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pleasure), daughter of Cupid and Psyche.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pleiades</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pleˈia-des), seven of Diana’s nymphs, changed into stars, one being lost.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Plenty</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Plenty), the Horn of.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Plexippus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Plex-ipˈpus), brother of Althea.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pliny</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Plinˈy), Roman naturalist.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pluto</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pluˈto), the same as Hades, Dis, <abbr>etc.</abbr>; god of the Infernal Regions.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Plutus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pluˈtus), god of wealth.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Po</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Po), Italian river.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Polestar</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Polestar).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Polites</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Po-liˈtes), youngest son of Priam of Troy.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pollux</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Polˈlux), Castor and (Dioscuri, the Twins) (See Castor).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Polydectes</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pol-y-decˈtes), king of Seriphus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Polydore</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pol-y-doˈre), slain kinsman of Aeneas; whose blood nourished a bush that bled when broken.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Polyhymnia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pol-y-hymˈni-a), Muse of oratory and sacred song.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Polyidus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Po-lyˈi-dus), soothsayer.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Polynices</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pol-y-niˈces), King of Thebes.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Polyphemus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pol-y-pheˈmus), giant son of Neptune.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Polyxena</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Po-lyxˈe-na), daughter of King Priam of Troy.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pomona</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Po-moˈna), goddess of fruit-trees (See Vertumnus).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Porrex and Ferrex</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Porˈrex and Ferˈrex), sons of Leir, King of Britain.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Portunus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Por-tuˈnus), Roman name for Palaemon (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Poseidon Neptune</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Po-seiˈdon (Neptune)), ruler of the ocean.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Poverty</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Poverty).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Precipice</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Precˈi-pice), threshold of Helas hall.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Prester John</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Presˈter John), a rumored priest or presbyter, a Christian pontiff in Upper Asia, believed in but never found.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Priam</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Priˈam), king of Troy.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Priwen</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Priˈwen), Arthur’s shield.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Procris</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Proˈcris), beloved but jealous wife of Cephalus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Procrustes</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pro-crusˈtes), who seized travellers and bound them on his iron bed, stretching the short ones and cutting short the tall; thus also himself served by Theseus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Proetus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Proeˈtus), jealous of Bellerophon.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Prometheus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pro-meˈtheus), creator of man, who stole fire from heaven for man’s use.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Proserpine</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Prosˈer-pine), the same as Persephone, goddess of all growing things, daughter of Ceres, carried off by Pluto.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Protesilaus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pro-tes-i-laˈus), slain by Hector the Trojan, allowed by the gods to return for three hours’ talk with his widow Laodomia.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Proteus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Proˈteus), the old man of the sea.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Prudence Metis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pruˈdence (Metis)), spouse of Jupiter.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pryderi</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pryˈderi), son of Pwyll.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Psyche</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Psyˈche), a beautiful maiden, personification of the human soul, sought by Cupid (Love), to whom she responded, lost him by curiosity to see him (as he came to her only by night), but finally through his prayers was made immortal and restored to him; a symbol of immortality.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Puranas</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pu-raˈnas), Hindu Scriptures.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pwyll</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pwyll), Prince of Dyved.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pygmalion</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pyg-maˈli-on), sculptor in love with a statue he had made, brought to life by Venus; also brother of Queen Dido.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pygmies</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pygˈmies), nation of dwarfs, at war with the Cranes.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pylades</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pyˈla-des), son of Straphius, friend of Orestes.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pyramus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pyrˈa-mus), who loved Thisbe, next-door neighbor, and, their parents opposing, they talked through cracks in the house-wall, agreeing to meet in the nearby woods; where Pyramus, finding a bloody veil and thinking Thisbe slain, killed himself, and she, seeing his body, killed herself. (Burlesqued in Shakespeare’s “Midsummer Night’s Dream”).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pyrrha</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pyrˈrha), wife of Deucalion (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pyrrhus Neoptolemus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pyrˈrhus (Neoptolemus)), son of Achilles.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pythagoras</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Py-thagˈo-ras), Greek philosopher (540 <abbr class="era">BC</abbr>), who thought numbers to be the essence and principle of all things, and taught transmigration of souls of the dead into new life as human or animal beings.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pythia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pythˈi-a), priestess of Apollo at Delphi.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pythian Games</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pythˈi-an Games).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Pythian Oracle</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pythˈi-an Oracle).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Python</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Pyˈthon), serpent springing from Deluge slum, destroyed by Apollo.</p>
					</dd>
				</dl>
			</section>
			<section id="glossary-q">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Q</h3>
				<dl>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Quirinus from quiris</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Qui-riˈnus (from quiris), a lance or spear), a war god, said to be Romulus, founder of Rome.</p>
					</dd>
				</dl>
			</section>
			<section id="glossary-r">
				<h3 epub:type="title">R</h3>
				<dl>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Rabican</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Rabˈi-can), noted horse.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ragnarok</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Rag-na-rokˈ), the twilight (or ending) of the gods.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Rajputs</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Rajˈputs), minor Hindu caste.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Regan</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Reˈgan), daughter of Leir.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Regillus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Re-gilˈlus), lake in Latium, noted for battle fought nearby between the Romans and the Latins.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Reggio</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Regˈgi-o), family from which Rogero sprang.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Remus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Reˈmus), brother of Romulus, founder of Rome.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Rhadamanthus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Rhad-a-manˈthus), son of Jupiter and Europa, after his death one of the judges in the lower world.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Rhapsodist</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Rhapˈso-dist), professional reciter of poems among the Greeks.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Rhea</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Rheˈa), female Titan, wife of Saturn (Cronos), mother of the chief gods, worshipped in Greece and Rome.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Rhine</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Rhine), river.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Rhinemaidens</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Rhine-maidens), or daughters, three water-nymphs, Flosshilda, Woglinda, and Wellgunda, set to guard the Nibelungen Hoard (which see), buried in the Rhine.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Rhodes</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Rhodes), one of the seven cities claiming to be Homer’s birthplace.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Rhodope</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Rhoˈdo-pe), mountain in Thrace.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Rhongomyant</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Rhonˈgom-yant), Arthur’s lance.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Rhoecus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Rhoeˈcus), a youth, beloved by a Dryad, but who brushed away a bee sent by her to call him to her, and she punished him with blindness.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Rhiannon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Rhi-anˈnon), wife of Pwyll.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Rinaldo</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ri-nalˈdo), one of the bravest knights of Charlemagne.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>River Ocean</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(River Ocean), flowing around the earth.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Robert de Beauvais</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Robert de Beau-vaisˈ), Norman poet (1257).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Robin Hood</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Robˈin Hood), famous outlaw in English legend, about time of Richard Coeur de Lion.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Rockingham</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Rockˈing-ham), forest of.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Rodomont</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Roˈdo-mont), king of Algiers.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Rogero</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ro-geˈro), noted Saracen knight.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Roland Orlando</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Roˈland (Orlando)), −, See Orlando.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Romances</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Romances), -.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Romanus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ro-maˈnus), legendary great-grandson of Noah.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Rome</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Rome).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Romulus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Romˈu-lus), founder of Rome.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ron</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ron), Arthur’s lance.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Roncesvalles</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ronces-vallesˈ), battle of.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Round Table</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Round Table), King Arthur’s, instituted by Merlin the Sage for Pendragon, Arthur’s father, as a knightly order, continued and made famous by Arthur and his knights.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Runic characters</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ruˈnic characters), or runes, alphabetic signs used by early Teutonic peoples, written or graved on metal or stone.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Rutulians</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ru-tuˈli-ans), an ancient people in Italy, subdued at an early period by the Romans.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ryence</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ryˈence), king in Ireland.</p>
					</dd>
				</dl>
			</section>
			<section id="glossary-s">
				<h3 epub:type="title">S</h3>
				<dl>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Sabra</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Saˈbra), maiden for whom Severn River was named, daughter of Locrine and Estrildis, thrown into river Severn by Locrine’s wife, transformed to a river-nymph, poetically named Sabrina.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Sacripant</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Sacˈri-pant), king of Circassia.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Saffire</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Safˈfire), Sir, knight of Arthur.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Sagas</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Saˈgas), Norse tales of heroism, composed by the Skalds (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Sagittarius</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Sa-git-taˈri-us).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Sagramour</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Sagˈra-mour), knight of Arthur.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn><abbr>St.</abbr> John</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(<abbr>St.</abbr> John), -.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn><abbr>St.</abbr> Michaels Mount</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(<abbr>St.</abbr> Michael’s Mount), precipitous pointed rock-hill on the coast of Brittany, opposite Cornwall.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Sakyasinha</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Sak-ya-sinˈha), the Lion, epithet applied to Buddha.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Salamander</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Salˈa-manˈder), a lizard-like animal, fabled to be able to live in fire.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Salamis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Salˈa-mis), Grecian city.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Salmoneus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Sal-moˈneus), son of Aeolus and Enarete, and brother of Sisyphus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Salomon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Salˈo-mon), king of Brittany, at Charlemagne’s court.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Samhin</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Samhˈin), or “fire of peace,” a Druidical festival.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Samian sage Pythagoras</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Saˈmi-an sage (Pythagoras)).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Samos</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Saˈmos), island in the Aegean Sea.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Samothracian gods</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Sam-o-thraˈcian gods), a group of agricultural divinities, worshipped in Samothrace.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Samson</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Samˈson), Hebrew hero, thought by some to be original of Hercules.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Sangreal See Graal</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(San-greal (See Graal), the Holy).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Sappho</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Sapphˈo), Greek poetess, who leaped into the sea from promontory of Leucadia, in disappointed love for Phaon.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Saracens</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Saˈra-cens), followers of Mahomet.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Sarpedon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Sar-peˈdon), son of Jupiter and Europa, killed by Patroclus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Saturn Cronos</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Satˈurn (Cronos)).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Saturnalia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Satˈur-naˈli-a), annual festival held by Romans in honor of Saturn.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Saturnia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Sa-turˈni-a), an ancient name of Italy.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Satyrs</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Saˈtyrs), male divinities of the forest, half man, half goat.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Scaliger</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Scalˈi-ger), famous German scholar of 16th century.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Scandinavia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Scan-di-naˈvi-a), mythology of, giving account of Northern gods, heroes, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Scheria</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Scheˈri-a), mythical island, abode of the Phaeacians.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Schrimnir</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Schrimˈnir), the boar, cooked nightly for the heroes of Valhalla, becoming whole every morning.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Scio</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Sciˈo), one of the island cities claiming to be Homer’s birthplace.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Scopas</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Scoˈpas), King of Thessaly.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Scorpion</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Scorˈpion), constellation.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Scylla</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Scylˈla), sea-nymph beloved by Glaucus, but changed by jealous Circe to a monster and finally to a dangerous rock on the Sicilian coast, facing the whirlpool Charybdis, many mariners being wrecked between the two. Also daughter of King Nisus of Megara, who loved Minos, besieging her father’s city, but he disliked her disloyalty and drowned her; also a fair virgin of Sicily, friend of sea-nymph Galatea.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Scyros</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Scyˈros), where Theseus was slain.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Scythia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Scythˈi-a), country lying north of Euxine Sea.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Sea</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Sea), the.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Seanymphs</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Sea-nymphs).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Seasons</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Seaˈsons).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Semele</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Semˈe-le), daughter of Cadmus and, by Jupiter, mother of Bacchus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Semiramis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Se-mirˈa-mis), with Ninus the mythical founder of the Assyrian empire of Nineveh.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Senapus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Senˈa-pus), King of Abyssinia, who entertained Astolpho.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Serapis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Se-raˈpis), or Hermes, Egyptian divinity of Tartarus and of medicine.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Serfs</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Serfs), slaves of the land.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Seriphus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Se-riˈphus), island in the Aegean Sea; one of the Cyclades.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Serpent Northern constellation</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Serpent (Northern constellation)).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Sestos</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Sesˈtos), dwelling of Hero (which see, also Leander).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Seven against Thebes</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(“Seven against Thebes),” famous Greek expedition.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Severn river</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Sevˈern river), in England.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Sevinus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Sevˈi-nus), Duke of Guienne.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Shalott</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Sha-lottˈ), the Lady of, ff.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Shatriya</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Sha-triˈya), Hindu warrior caste.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Sherasmin</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Sherˈas-min), French chevalier.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Sibyl</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Sibˈyl), prophetess of Cumae.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Sichaeus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Si-chaeˈus), husband of Dido (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Sicily</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Sicˈi-ly).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Siege Perilous</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Siege Perˈi-lous), the chair of purity at Arthur’s Round Table, fatal to any but him who was destined to achieve the quest of the Sangreal (See Galahad).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Siegfried</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Siegˈfried), young King of the Netherlands, husband of Kriemhild; she boasted to Brunhild that Siegfried had aided Günther to beat her in athletic contests, thus winning her as wife, and Brunhild, in anger, employed Hagan to murder Siegfried. As hero of Wagner’s “Valkyrie,” he wins the Nibelungen treasure-ring, loves and deserts Brunhild, and is slain by Hagan.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Sieglinda</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Sieg-linˈda), wife of Hunding, mother of Siegfried by Siegmund.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Siegmund</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Siegˈmund), father of Siegfried.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Sigtryg</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Sigˈtryg), Prince, betrothed of King Alef’s daughter, aided by Hereward.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Siguna</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Si-guˈna), wife of Loki.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Silenus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Si-leˈnus), a Satyr, schoolmaster of Bacchus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Silures South Wales</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Si-luˈres (South Wales)).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Silver Age</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Silver Age).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Silvia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Silˈvi-a), daughter of Latin shepherd.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Silvius</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Silˈvi-us), grandson of Aeneas, accidentally killed in the chase by his son Brutus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Simonides</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Si-monˈi-des), an early poet of Greece.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Sinon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Siˈnon), a Greek spy, who persuaded the Trojans to take the Wooden Horse (which see) into their city.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Sirens</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Siˈrens), sea-nymphs, whose singing charmed mariners to leap into the sea; passing their island, Ulysses stopped the ears of his sailors with wax, and had himself bound to the mast so that he could hear but not yield to their music.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Sirius</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Sirˈi-us), the dog of Orion, changed to the Dog-star.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Sisyphus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Sisˈy-phus), condemned in Tartarus to perpetually roll up hill a big rock which, when the top was reached, rolled down again.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Siva</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Siˈva), the Destroyer, third person of the Hindu triad of gods.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Skalds</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Skalds), Norse bards and poets.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Skidbladnir</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Skid-bladˈnir), Freyr’s ship.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Skirnir</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Skirˈnir), Frey’s messenger, who won the god’s magic sword by getting him Gerda for his wife.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Skrymir</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Skryˈmir), a giant, Utgard Loki (which see) in disguise, who fooled Thor in athletic feats.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Skuld</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Skuld), the Norn of the Future.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Sleep</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Sleep), twin brother of Death.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Sleipnir</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Sleipˈnir), Odin’s horse.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Sobrino</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(So-briˈno), councillor to Agramant.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Somnus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Somˈnus), child of Nox, twin brother of Mors, god of sleep.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Sophocles</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Sophˈo-cles), Greek tragic dramatist.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>South wind</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(South wind), See Notus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Sparta</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Sparˈta), capital of Lacedaemon.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Sphinx</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Sphinx), a monster, waylaying the road to Thebes and propounding riddles to all passers, on pain of death for wrong guessing, who killed herself in rage when Aedipus guessed aright.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Spring</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Spring).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Stonehenge</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Stoneˈhenge), circle of huge upright stones, fabled to be sepulchre of Pendragon.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Strophius</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Stroˈphi-us), father of Pylades.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Stygian realm</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Stygˈi-an realm), Hades.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Stygian sleep</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Stygˈi-an sleep), escaped from the beauty-box sent from Hades to Venus by hand of Psyche, who curiously opened the box and was plunged into unconsciousness.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Styx</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Styx), river, bordering Hades, to be crossed by all the dead.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Sudras</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Suˈdras), Hindu laboring caste.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Summer</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Summer).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Sun</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Sun).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Surtur</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Surˈtur), leader of giants against the gods in the day of their destruction (Norse mythology).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Surya</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Surˈya), Hindu god of the sun, corresponding to the Greek Helios.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Sutri</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Suˈtri), Orlando’s birthplace.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Svadilfari</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Sva-dil-faˈri), giant’s horse.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Swan</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Swan), Leda and the.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Sybaris</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Sybˈa-ris), Greek city in Southern Italy, famed for luxury.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Sylvanus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Syl-vaˈnus), Latin divinity identified with Pan.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Symplegades</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Sym-plegˈa-des), floating rocks passed by the Argonauts.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Syrinx</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Syˈrinx), nymph, pursued by Pan, but escaping by being changed to a bunch of reeds (See Pandean pipes).</p>
					</dd>
				</dl>
			</section>
			<section id="glossary-t">
				<h3 epub:type="title">T</h3>
				<dl>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Tacitus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Tacˈi-tus), Roman historian.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Taenarus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Taenˈa-rus), Greek entrance to lower regions.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Tagus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Taˈgus), river in Spain and Portugal.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Taliesin</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Talˈie-sin), Welsh bard.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Tanais</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Tanˈa-is), ancient name of river Don.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Tantalus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Tanˈta-lus), wicked king, punished in Hades by standing in water that retired when he would drink, under fruit-trees that withdrew when he would eat.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Tarchon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Tarˈchon), Etruscan chief.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Tarentum</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ta-renˈtum), Italian city.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Tarpeian rock</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Tar-peˈian rock), in Rome, from which condemned criminals were hurled.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Tarquins</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Tarˈquins), a ruling family in early Roman legend.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Tauris</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Tauˈris), Grecian city, site of temple of Diana (See Iphigenia).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Taurus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Tauˈrus), a mountain.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Tartarus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Tarˈta-rus), place of confinement of Titans, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, originally a black abyss below Hades; later, represented as place where the wicked were punished, and sometimes the name used as synonymous with Hades.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Teirtu</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Teirˈtu), the harp of.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Telamon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Telˈa-mon), Greek hero and adventurer, father of Ajax.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Telemachus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Te-lemˈa-chus), son of Ulysses and Penelope.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Tellus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Telˈlus), another name for Rhea.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Tenedos</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Tenˈe-dos), an island in Aegean Sea.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Terminus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Terˈmi-nus), Roman divinity presiding over boundaries and frontiers.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Terpsichore</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Terp-sichˈo-re), Muse of dancing.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Terra</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Terˈra), goddess of the earth.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Tethys</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Teˈthys), goddess of the sea.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Teucer</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Teuˈcer), ancient king of the Trojans.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Thalia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Tha-liˈa), one of the three Graces (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Thamyris</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Thamˈy-ris), Thracian bard, who challenged the Muses to competition in singing, and, defeated, was blinded.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Thaukt</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Thaukt), Loki disguised as a hag.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Thebes</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Thebes), city founded by Cadmus, and capital of Boeotia.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Themis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Theˈmis), female Titan, law-counsellor of Jove.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Theodora</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(The-o-doˈra), sister of Prince Leo.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Theron</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Theˈron), one of Diana’s dogs.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Thersites</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ther-siˈtes), a brawler, killed by Achilles.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Thescelus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Thesˈce-lus), foe of Perseus, turned to stone by sight of Gorgon’s head.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Theseum</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(The-seˈum), Athenian temple in honor of Theseus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Theseus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Theˈse-us), son of Aegeus and Aethra, King of Athens, a great hero of many adventures.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Thessaly</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Thesˈsaly).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Thestius</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Thesˈti-us), father of Althea (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Thetis</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Theˈtis), mother of Achilles.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Thialfi</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Thiˈal-fi), Thor’s servant.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Thisbe</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Thisˈbe), Babylonian maiden beloved by Pyramus (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Thor</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Thor), the thunderer, of Norse mythology, most popular of the gods.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Thrace</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Thrace).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Thrinakia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Thri-naˈki-a), island pasturing Hyperion’s cattle, where Ulysses landed, but, his men killing some cattle for food, their ship was wrecked by lightning.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Thrym</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Thrym), giant, who buried Thor’s hammer.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Thucydides</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Thu-cydˈi-des), Greek historian.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Tiber</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Tiˈber), river flowing through Rome.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Tiber</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Tiber), Father, god of the river.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Tigris</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Tiˈgris), river.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Tintadel</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Tin-taˈdel), castle of, residence of King Mark of Cornwall.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Tiresias</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ti-reˈsi-as), a Greek soothsayer.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Tisiphone</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ti-siphˈo-ne), one of the Furies (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Titans</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Tiˈtans), the sons and daughters of Uranus (Heaven) and Gaea (Earth), enemies of the gods and overcome by them.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Tithonus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ti-thoˈnus), Trojan prince.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Tityus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Titˈy-us), giant in Tartarus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Tmolus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Tmoˈlus), a mountain god.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Tortoise</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Tortoise), second avatar (which see) of Vishnu.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Tournaments</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Tournaments), -.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Tours</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Tours), battle of (See Abdalrahman and Charles Martel).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Toxeus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Toxˈe-us), brother of Melauger’s mother, who snatched from Atalanta her hunting trophy, and was slain by Melauger, who had awarded it to her.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Triad</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Triad), the Hindu.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Triads</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Triads), Welsh poems.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Trimurti</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Tri-murˈti), Hindu Triad.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Triptolemus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Trip-tolˈe-mus), son of Celeus (which see), and who, made great by Ceres, founded her worship in Eleusis.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Tristram</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Trisˈtram), one of Arthur’s knights, husband of Isoude of the White Hands, lover of Isoude the Fair.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Triton</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Triˈton), a demigod of the sea, son of Poseidon (Neptune) and Amphitrite.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Troezen</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Troeˈzen), Greek city of Argolis.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Trojans</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Troˈjans).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Trojan War</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Troˈjan War).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Trojanova</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Tro-ja-noˈva), New Troy, city founded in Britain (See Brutus, and Lud).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Trophonius</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Tro-phoˈni-us), oracle of, in Boeotia.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Troubadours</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Trouˈba-dours), poets and minstrels of Provence, in Southern France.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Trouveurs</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Trou-veursˈ), poets and minstrels of Northern France.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Troy</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Troy), city in Asia Minor, ruled by King Priam, whose son, Paris, stole away Helen, wife of Menelaus the Greek, resulting in the Trojan War and the destruction of Troy.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Troy</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Troy), fall of.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Turnus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Turˈnus), chief of the Rutulianes in Italy, unsuccessful rival of Aeneas for Lavinia.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Turpin</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Turˈpin), Archbishop of Rheims.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Turquine</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Turˈquine), Sir, a great knight, foe of Arthur, slain by Sir Launcelot.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Typhon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Tyˈphon), one of the giants who attacked the gods, were defeated, and imprisoned under <abbr>Mt.</abbr> Aetna.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Tyr</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Tyr), Norse god of battles.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Tyre</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Tyre), Phoenician city governed by Dido (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Tyrians</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Tyrˈians).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Tyrrheus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Tyrˈrhe-us), herdsman of King Turnus in Italy, the slaying of whose daughter’s stag aroused war upon Aeneas and his companions.</p>
					</dd>
				</dl>
			</section>
			<section id="glossary-u">
				<h3 epub:type="title">U</h3>
				<dl>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Uberto</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(U-berˈto), son of Galafron.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ulysses Greek</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(U-lysˈses (Greek), Odysseus), hero of the Odyssey.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Unicorn</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Uˈni-corn), fabled animal with a single horn.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Urania</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(U-raˈni-a), one of the Muses, a daughter of Zeus by Mnemosyne.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Urdur</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Urˈdur), one of the Norns or Fates of Scandinavia, representing the Past.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Usk</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Usk), British river.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Utgard</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Utˈgard), abode of the giant Utgard-Loki.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>UtgardLoki</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Utˈgard-Loˈki), King of the Giants (See Skrymir).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Uther Uther Pendragon</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Uˈther (Uther Pendragon)), king of Britain and father of Arthur.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Uwaine</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(U-waineˈ), knight of Arthur’s court.</p>
					</dd>
				</dl>
			</section>
			<section id="glossary-v">
				<h3 epub:type="title">V</h3>
				<dl>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Vaissyas</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Va-isˈsy-as), Hindu caste of agriculturists and traders.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Valhalla</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Val-halˈla), hall of Odin, heavenly residence of slain heroes.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Valkyrie</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Val-kyˈrie), armed and mounted warlike virgins, daughters of the gods (Norse), Odin’s messengers, who select slain heroes for Valhalla and serve them at their feasts.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ve</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ve), brother of Odin.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Vedas</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Veˈdas), Hindu sacred Scriptures.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Venedotia</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ven-e-doˈti-a), ancient name for North Wales.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Venus Aphrodite</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Veˈnus (Aphrodite)), goddess of beauty.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Venus de Medici</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Veˈnus de Medˈi-ci), famous antique statue in Uffizi Gallery, Florence, Italy.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Verdandi</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ver-danˈdi), the Present, one of the Norns (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Vertumnus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ver-tumˈnus), god of the changing seasons, whose varied appearances won the love of Pomona.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Vesta</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Vesˈta), daughter of Cronos and Rhea; goddess of the home-fire, or hearth.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Vestals</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Vesˈtals), virgin priestesses in temple of Vesta.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Vesuvius</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ve-suˈvi-us), Mount, volcano near Naples.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Villains</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Villains), peasants in the feudal scheme.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Vigrid</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Vigˈrid), final battlefield, with destruction of the gods and their enemies, the sun, the earth, and time itself.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Vili</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Viˈli), brother of Odin and Ve.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Virgil</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Virˈgil), celebrated Latin poet (See Aeneid).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Virgo</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Virˈgo), constellation of the Virgin, representing Astraea, goddess of innocence and purity.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Vishnu</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Vishˈnu), the Preserver, second of the three chief Hindu gods.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Viviane</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Vivˈi-ane), lady of magical powers, who allured the sage Merlin and imprisoned him in an enchanted wood.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Volscens</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Volˈscens), Rutulian troop leader who killed Nisus and Euryalus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Volsunga Saga</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Volˈsung-a Saˈga), an Icelandic poem, giving about the same legends as the Nibelungen Lied (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Vortigern</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Vorˈti-gern), usurping King of Britain, defeated by Pendragon.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Vulcan Greek</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Vulˈcan) (Greek Haephestus), god of fire and metalworking, with forges under Aetna, husband of Venus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Vyasa</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Vy-aˈsa), Hindu sage.</p>
					</dd>
				</dl>
			</section>
			<section id="glossary-w">
				<h3 epub:type="title">W</h3>
				<dl>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Wain</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Wain), the, constellation.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Wellgunda</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Well-gunˈda), one of the Rhine-daughters (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Welsh language</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Welsh language).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Western Ocean</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Western Ocean).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Winds</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Winds), the.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Winter</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Winter).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Woden</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Woˈden), chief god in the Norse mythology; Anglo-Saxon for Odin.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Woglinda</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Wog-linˈda), one of the Rhine-daughters (which see).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Woman</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Woman), creation of.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Wooden Horse</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Wooden Horse), the, filled with armed men, but left outside of Troy as a pretended offering to Minerva when the Greeks feigned to sail away; accepted by the Trojans (See Sinon, and Laocoön), brought into the city, and at night emptied of the hidden Greek soldiers, who destroyed the town.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Woodnymphs</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Wood-nymphs).</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Wotan</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Woˈtan), Old High German form of Odin.</p>
					</dd>
				</dl>
			</section>
			<section id="glossary-x">
				<h3 epub:type="title">X</h3>
				<dl>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Xanthus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Xanˈthus), river of Asia Minor.</p>
					</dd>
				</dl>
			</section>
			<section id="glossary-y">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Y</h3>
				<dl>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Yama</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Yaˈma), Hindu god of the Infernal Regions.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Year</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Year), the.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ygdrasil</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Yg-draˈsil), great ash tree, supposed by Norse mythology to support the universe.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ymir</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Yˈmir), giant, slain by Odin.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Ynywl</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ynˈywl), Earl, host of Geraint, father of Enid.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>York</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(York), Britain.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Yserone</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Y-se-roˈne), niece of Arthur, mother of Caradoc.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Yspadaden Penkawr</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Ysˈpa-da-den Penˈkawr), father of Olwen.</p>
					</dd>
				</dl>
			</section>
			<section id="glossary-z">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Z</h3>
				<dl>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Zendavesta</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Zendˈa-vesˈta), Persian sacred Scriptures.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Zephyrus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Zephˈy-rus), god of the South wind.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Zerbino</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Zer-biˈno), a knight, son of the king of Scotland.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Zetes</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Zeˈtes), winged warrior, companion of Theseus.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Zethus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Zeˈthus), son of Jupiter and Antiope, brother of Amphion. See Dirce.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Zeus</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Zeus), See Jupiter.</p>
					</dd>
					<dt>
						<dfn>Zoroaster</dfn>
					</dt>
					<dd>
						<p>(Zo-ro-asˈter), founder of the Persian religion, which was dominant in Western Asia from about 550 <abbr class="era">BC</abbr> to about 650 <abbr class="era">AD</abbr>, and is still held by many thousands in Persia and in India.</p>
					</dd>
				</dl>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
